INTRODUCTION


Ghosts are the true immortals, and the dead grow more alive all the
time. Wraiths have a greater vitality to-day than ever before. They are
far more numerous than at any time in the past, and people are more
interested in them. There are persons that claim to be acquainted with
specific spirits, to speak with them, to carry on correspondence with
them, and even some who insist that they are private secretaries to the
dead. Others of us mortals, more reserved, are content to keep such
distance as we may from even the shadow of a shade. But there's no
getting away from ghosts nowadays, for even if you shut your eyes to
them in actual life, you stumble over them in the books you read, you
see them on the stage and on the screen, and you hear them on the
lecture platform. Even a Lodge in any vast wilderness would have the
company of spirits. Man's love for the supernatural, which is one of the
most natural things about him, was never more marked than at present.
You may go a-ghosting in any company to-day, and all aspects of
literature, novels, short stories, poetry, and drama alike, reflect the
shadeless spirit. The latest census of the haunting world shows a vast
increase in population, which might be explained on various grounds.

Life is so inconveniently complex nowadays, what with income taxes and
other visitations of government, that it is hard for us to have the
added risk of wraiths, but there's no escaping. Many persons of to-day
are in the same mental state as one Mr. Boggs, told of in a magazine
story, a rural gentleman who was agitated over spectral visitants. He
had once talked at a seance with a speaker who claimed to be the spirit
of his brother, Wesley Boggs, but who conversed only on blue suspenders,
a subject not of vital interest to Wesley in the flesh. "Still," Mr.
Boggs reflected, "I'm not so darn sure!" In answer to a suggestion
regarding subliminal consciousness and dual personality as explanation
of the strange things that come bolting into life, he said, "It's crawly
any way you look at it. Ghosts inside you are as bad as ghosts outside
you." There are others to-day who are "not so darn sure!"

One may conjecture divers reasons for this multitude of ghosts in late
literature. Perhaps spooks are like small boys that rush to fires,
unwilling to miss anything, and craving new sensations. And we mortals
read about them to get vicarious thrills through the safe _medium_ of
fiction. The war made sensationalists of us all, and the drab
everydayness of mortal life bores us. Man's imagination, always bigger
than his environment, overleaps the barriers of time and space and
claims all worlds as eminent domain, so that literature, which he has
the power to create, as he cannot create his material surroundings,
possesses a dramatic intensity, an epic sweep, unknown in actuality. In
the last analysis, man is as great as his daydreams--or his nightmares!

Ghosts have always haunted literature, and doubtless always will.
Specters seem never to wear out or to die, but renew their tissue both
of person and of raiment, in marvelous fashion, so that their number
increases with a Malthusian relentlessness. We of to-day have the ghosts
that haunted our ancestors, as well as our own modern revenants, and
there's no earthly use trying to banish or exorcise them by such a
simple thing as disbelief in them. Schopenhauer asserts that a belief in
ghosts is born with man, that it is found in all ages and in all lands,
and that no one is free from it. Since accounts vary, and our earliest
antecedents were poor diarists, it is difficult to establish the
apostolic succession of spooks in actual life, but in literature, the
line reaches back as far as the primeval picture writing. A study of
animism in primitive culture shows many interesting links between the
past and the present in this matter. And anyhow, since man knows that
whether or not he has seen a ghost, presently he'll be one, he's
fascinated with the subject. And he creates ghosts, not merely in his
own image, but according to his dreams of power.

The more man knows of natural laws, the keener he is about the
supernatural. He may claim to have laid aside superstition, but he isn't
to be believed in that. Though he has discarded witchcraft and alchemy,
it is only that he may have more time for psychical research; true, he
no longer dabbles with ancient magic, but that is because the modern
types, as the ouija board, entertain him more. He dearly loves to
traffic with that other world of which he knows so little and concerning
which he is so curious.

Perhaps the war, or possibly an increase in class consciousness, or
unionization of spirits, or whatever, has greatly energized the ghost in
our day and given him both ambition and strength to do more things than
ever. Maybe "pep tablets" have been discovered on the other side as
well! No longer is the ghost content to be seen and not heard, to slink
around in shadowy corners as apologetically as poor relations. Wraiths
now have a rambunctious vitality and self-assurance that are
astonishing. Even the ghosts of folks dead so long they have forgotten
about themselves are yawning, stretching their skeletons, and starting
out to do a little haunting. Spooky creatures in such a wide diversity
are abroad to-day that one is sometimes at a loss to know what to do
"gin a body meet a body." Ghosts are entering all sorts of activities
now, so that mortals had better look alive, else they'll be crowded out
of their place in the shade. The dead are too much with us!

Modern ghosts are less simple and primitive than their ancestors, and
are developing complexes of various kinds. They are more democratic than
of old, and have more of a diversity of interests, so that mortals have
scarcely the ghost of a chance with them. They employ all the agencies
and mechanisms known to mortals, and have in addition their own methods
of transit and communication. Whereas in the past a ghost had to stalk
or glide to his haunts, now he limousines or airplanes, so that
naturally he can get in more work than before. He uses the wireless to
send his messages, and is expert in all manner of scientific lines.

In fact, his infernal efficiency and knowledge of science constitute the
worst terror of the current specter. Who can combat a ghost that knows
all about a chemical laboratory, that can add electricity to his other
shocks, and can employ all mortal and immortal agencies as his own?
Science itself is supernatural, as we see when we look at it properly.

Modern literature, especially the most recent, shows a revival of old
types of ghosts, together with the innovations of the new. There are
specters that take a real part in the plot complication, and those that
merely cast threatening looks at the living, or at least, are content to
speak a piece and depart. Some spirits are dumb, while others are highly
elocutionary.

Ghosts vary in many respects. Some are like the pallid shades of the
past, altogether unlike the living and with an unmistakable spectral
form--or lack of it. They sweep like mist through the air, or flutter
like dead leaves in the gale--a gale always accompanying them as part of
the stock furnishings. On the other hand, some revenants are so
successfully made up that one doesn't believe them when they pridefully
announce that they are wraiths. Some of them are, in fact, so alive that
they don't themselves know they're dead. It's going to be a great shock
to some of them one of these days to wake up and find out they're
demised!

Ghosts are more gregarious than in the past. Formerly a shade slunk off
by himself, as if ashamed of his profession, as if aware of the lack of
cordiality with which he would be received, knowing that mortals shunned
and feared him, and chary even of associating with his fellow-shades. He
wraithed all by himself. The specters of the past--save in scenes of the
lower world,--were usually solitary creatures, driven to haunt mortals
from very lonesomeness. Now we have a chance to study the mob psychology
of ghosts, for they come in madding crowds whenever they like.

Ghosts at present are showing an active interest not only in public
affairs, but in the arts as well. At least, we now have pictures and
writing attributed to them. Perhaps annoyed by some of the inaccuracies
published concerning them--for authors have in the past taken advantage
of the belief that ghosts couldn't write back--they have recently
developed itching pens. They use all manner of utensils for expression
now. There's the magic typewriter that spooks for John Kendrick Bangs,
the boardwalk that Patience Worth executes for Mrs. Curran, and
innumerable other specters that commandeer fountain pens and pencils and
brushes to give their versions of infinity. There's a passion on the
part of ghosts for being interviewed just now. At present
book-reviewers, for instance, had better be careful, lest the wraiths
take their own method of answering criticism. It isn't safe to speak or
write with anything but respect of ghosts now. _De mortuis nil nisi
bonum_, indeed! One should never make light of a shade.

Modern ghosts have a more pronounced personality than the specters of
the past. They have more strength, of mind as well as of body, than the
colorless revenants of earlier literature, and they produce a more vivid
effect on the beholder and the reader. They know more surely what they
wish to do, and they advance relentlessly and with economy of effort to
the effecting of their purpose, whether it be of pure horror, of beauty,
or pathos of humor. We have now many spirits in fiction that are
pathetic without frightfulness, many that move us with a sense of poetic
beauty rather than of curdling horror, who touch the heart as well as
the spine of the reader. And the humorous ghost is a distinctive shade
of to-day, with his quips and pranks and haunting grin. Whatever a
modern ghost wishes to do or to be, he is or does, with confidence and
success.

The spirit of to-day is terrifyingly visible or invisible at will. The
dreadful presence of a ghost that one cannot see is more unbearable than
the specter that one can locate and attempt to escape from. The
invisible haunting is represented in this volume by Fitz-James O'Brien's
_What Was It?_ one of the very best of the type, and one that has
strongly influenced others. O'Brien's story preceded Guy de Maupassant's
_Le Horla_ by several years, and must surely have suggested to
Maupassant as to Bierce, in his _The Damned Thing_, the power of evil
that can be felt but not seen.

The wraith of the present carries with him more vital energy than his
predecessors, is more athletic in his struggles with the unlucky wights
he visits, and can coerce mortals to do his will by the laying on of
hands as well as by the look or word. He speaks with more emphasis and
authority, as well as with more human naturalness, than the earlier
ghosts. He has not only all the force he possessed in life, but in many
instances has an access of power, which makes man a poor protagonist for
him. Algernon Blackwood's spirits of evil, for example, have a more
awful potentiality than any living person could have, and their will to
harm has been increased immeasurably by the accident of death. If the
facts bear out the fear that such is the case in life as in fiction,
some of our social customs will be reversed. A man will strive by all
means to keep his deadly enemy alive, lest death may endow him with
tenfold power to hurt. Dark discarnate passions, disembodied hates, work
evil where a simple ghost might be helpless and abashed. Algernon
Blackwood has command over the spirits of air and fire and wave, so that
his pages thrill with beauty and terror. He has handled almost all known
aspects of the supernatural, and from his many stories he has selected
for this volume _The Willows_ as the best example of his ghostly art.

Apparitions are more readily recognizable at present than in the past,
for they carry into eternity all the disfigurements or physical
peculiarities that the living bodies possessed--a fact discouraging to
all persons not conspicuous for good looks. Freckles and warts, long
noses and missing limbs distinguish the ghosts and aid in crucial
identification. The thrill of horror in Ambrose Bierce's story, _The
Middle Toe of the Right Foot_, is intensified by the fact that the dead
woman who comes back in revenge to haunt her murderer, has one toe
lacking as in life. And in a recent story a surgeon whose desire to
experiment has caused him needlessly to sacrifice a man's life on the
operating table, is haunted to death by the dismembered arm. Fiction
shows us various ghosts with half faces, and at least one notable spook
that comes in half. Such ability, it will be granted, must necessarily
increase the haunting power, for if a ghost may send a foot or an arm or
a leg to harry one person, he can dispatch his back-bone or his liver or
his heart to upset other human beings simultaneously in a sectional
haunting at once economically efficient and terrifying.

_The Beast with Five Fingers_, for instance, has a loathsome horror that
a complete skeleton or conventionally equipped wraith could not achieve.
Who can doubt that a bodiless hand leaping around on its errands of evil
has a menace that a complete six-foot frame could not duplicate? Yet, in
Quiller-Couch's _A Pair of Hands_, what pathos and beauty in the thought
of the child hands coming back to serve others in homely tasks! Surely
no housewife in these helpless days would object to being haunted in
such delicate fashion.

Ghosts of to-day have an originality that antique specters lacked. For
instance, what story of the past has the awful thrill in Andreyev's
_Lazarus_, that story of the man who came back from the grave, living,
yet dead, with the horror of the unknown so manifest in his face that
those who looked into his deep eyes met their doom? Present-day writers
skillfully combine various elements of awe with the supernatural, as
madness with the ghostly, adding to the chill of fear which each concept
gives. Wilbur Daniel Steele's _The Woman at Seven Brothers_ is an
instance of that method.

Poe's _Ligeia_, one of the best stories in any language, reveals the
unrelenting will of the dead to effect its desire,--the dead wife
triumphantly coming back to life through the second wife's body. Olivia
Howard Dunbar's _The Shell of Sense_ is another instance of jealousy
reaching beyond the grave. _The Messenger_, one of Robert W. Chambers's
early stories and an admirable example of the supernatural, has various
thrills, with its river of blood, its death's head moth, and the ancient
but very active skull of the Black Priest who was shot as a traitor to
his country, but lived on as an energetic and curseful ghost.

_The Shadows on the Wall_, by Mary E. Wilkins Freeman,--which one
prominent librarian considers the best ghost story ever written,--is
original in the method of its horrific manifestation. Isn't it more
devastating to one's sanity to see the shadow of a revenge ghost cast on
the wall,--to know that a vindictive spirit is beside one but
invisible--than to see the specter himself? Under such circumstances,
the sight of a skeleton or a sheeted phantom would be downright
comforting.

_The Mass of Shadows_, by Anatole France, is an example of the modern
tendency to show phantoms in groups, as contrasted with the solitary
habits of ancient specters. Here the spirits of those who had sinned for
love could meet and celebrate mass together in one evening of the year.

The delicate beauty of many of the modern ghostly stories is apparent in
_The Haunted Orchard_, by Richard Le Gallienne, for this prose poem has
an appeal of tenderness rather than of terror. And everybody who has
had affection for a dog will appreciate the pathos of the little sketch,
by Myla J. Closser, _At the Gate_. The dog appears more frequently as a
ghost than does any other animal, perhaps because man feels that he is
nearer the human,--though the horse is as intelligent and as much
beloved. There is an innate pathos about a dog somehow, that makes his
appearance in ghostly form more credible and sympathetic, while the
ghost of any other animal would tend to have a comic connotation. Other
animals in fiction have power of magic--notably the cat--but they don't
appear as spirits. But the dog is seen as a pathetic symbol of
faithfulness, as a tragic sufferer, or as a terrible revenge ghost. Dogs
may come singly or in groups--Edith Wharton has five of different sorts
in _Kerfol_--or in packs, as in Eden Phillpotts's _Another Little Heath
Hound_.

An illuminating instance of the power of fiction over human faith is
furnished by the case of Arthur Machen's _The Bowmen_, included here.
This story it is which started the whole tissue of legendry concerning
supernatural aid given the allied armies during the war. This purely
fictitious account of an angel army that saved the day at Mons was so
vivid that its readers accepted it as truth and obstinately clung to
that idea in the face of Mr. Machen's persistent and bewildered
explanations that he had invented the whole thing. Editors wrote leading
articles about it, ministers preached sermons on it, and the general
public preferred to believe in the Mons angels rather than in Arthur
Machen. Mr. Machen has shown himself an artist in the supernatural, one
whom his generation has not been discerning enough to appreciate. Some
of his material is painfully morbid, but his pen is magic and his
inkwell holds many dark secrets.

In this collection I have attempted to include specimens of a few of the
distinctive types of modern ghosts, as well as to show the art of
individual stories. Examples of the humorous ghosts are omitted here, as
a number of them will be brought together in _Humorous Ghost Stories_,
the companion volume to this. The ghost lover who reads these pages will
think of others that he would like to see included--for I believe that
readers are more passionately attached to their own favorite ghost tales
than to any other form of literature. But critics will admit the
manifest impossibility of bringing together in one volume all the famous
examples of the art. Some of the well-known tales, particularly the
older ones on which copyright has expired, have been reprinted so often
as to be almost hackneyed, while others have been of necessity omitted
because of the limitations of space.

                                                                    D.S.

NEW YORK,
  March, 1921.




CONTENTS


INTRODUCTION: THE IMPERISHABLE GHOST

THE WILLOWS
    BY ALGERNON BLACKWOOD

THE SHADOWS ON THE WALL
    BY MARY E. WILKINS FREEMAN

THE MESSENGER
    BY ROBERT W. CHAMBERS

LAZARUS
    BY LEONID ANDREYEV

THE BEAST WITH FIVE FINGERS
    BY W. F. HARVEY

THE MASS OF SHADOWS
    BY ANATOLE FRANCE

WHAT WAS IT?
    BY FITZ-JAMES O'BRIEN

THE MIDDLE TOE OF THE RIGHT FOOT
    BY AMBROSE BIERCE

THE SHELL OF SENSE
    BY OLIVIA HOWARD DUNBAR

THE WOMAN AT SEVEN BROTHERS
    BY WILBUR DANIEL STEELE

AT THE GATE
    BY MYLA JO CLOSSER

LIGEIA
    BY EDGAR ALLAN POE

THE HAUNTED ORCHARD
    BY RICHARD LE GALLIENNE

THE BOWMEN
    BY ARTHUR MACHEN

A GHOST
    BY GUY DE MAUPASSANT





The Willows

BY ALGERNON BLACKWOOD

     From _The Listener_, by Algernon Blackwood. Published in America by
     E.P. Dutton, and in England by Everleigh Nash, Ltd. By permission
     of the publishers and Algernon Blackwood.


I

After leaving Vienna, and long before you come to Buda-Pesth, the Danube
enters a region of singular loneliness and desolation, where its waters
spread away on all sides regardless of a main channel, and the country
becomes a swamp for miles upon miles, covered by a vast sea of low
willow-bushes. On the big maps this deserted area is painted in a fluffy
blue, growing fainter in color as it leaves the banks, and across it may
be seen in large straggling letters the word _Suempfe_, meaning marshes.

In high flood this great acreage of sand, shingle-beds, and willow-grown
islands is almost topped by the water, but in normal seasons the bushes
bend and rustle in the free winds, showing their silver leaves to the
sunshine in an ever-moving plain of bewildering beauty. These willows
never attain to the dignity of trees; they have no rigid trunks; they
remain humble bushes, with rounded tops and soft outline, swaying on
slender stems that answer to the least pressure of the wind; supple as
grasses, and so continually shifting that they somehow give the
impression that the entire plain is moving and _alive_. For the wind
sends waves rising and falling over the whole surface, waves of leaves
instead of waves of water, green swells like the sea, too, until the
branches turn and lift, and then silvery white as their under-side turns
to the sun.

Happy to slip beyond the control of stern banks, the Danube here wanders
about at will among the intricate network of channels intersecting the
islands everywhere with broad avenues down which the waters pour with a
shouting sound; making whirlpools, eddies, and foaming rapids; tearing
at the sandy banks; carrying away masses of shore and willow-clumps; and
forming new islands innumerable which shift daily in size and shape and
possess at best an impermanent life, since the flood-time obliterates
their very existence.

Properly speaking, this fascinating part of the river's life begins soon
after leaving Pressburg, and we, in our Canadian canoe, with gipsy tent
and frying-pan on board, reached it on the crest of a rising flood about
mid-July. That very same morning, when the sky was reddening before
sunrise, we had slipped swiftly through still-sleeping Vienna, leaving
it a couple of hours later a mere patch of smoke against the blue hills
of the Wienerwald on the horizon; we had breakfasted below Fischeramend
under a grove of birch trees roaring in the wind; and had then swept on
the tearing current past Orth, Hainburg, Petronell (the old Roman
Carnuntum of Marcus Aurelius), and so under the frowning heights of
Theben on a spur of the Carpathians, where the March steals in quietly
from the left and the frontier is crossed between Austria and Hungary.

Racing along at twelve kilometers an hour soon took us well into
Hungary, and the muddy waters--sure sign of flood--sent us aground on
many a shingle-bed, and twisted us like a cork in many a sudden belching
whirlpool before the towers of Pressburg (Hungarian, Poszony) showed
against the sky; and then the canoe, leaping like a spirited horse, flew
at top speed under the gray walls, negotiated safely the sunken chain of
the Fliegende Bruecke ferry, turned the corner sharply to the left, and
plunged on yellow foam into the wilderness of islands, sand-banks, and
swamp-land beyond--the land of the willows.

The change came suddenly, as when a series of bioscope pictures snaps
down on the streets of a town and shifts without warning into the
scenery of lake and forest. We entered the land of desolation on wings,
and in less than half an hour there was neither boat nor fishing-hut nor
red roof, nor any single sign of human habitation and civilization
within sight. The sense of remoteness from the world of human kind, the
utter isolation, the fascination of this singular world of willows,
winds, and waters, instantly laid its spell upon us both, so that we
allowed laughingly to one another that we ought by rights to have held
some special kind of passport to admit us, and that we had, somewhat
audaciously, come without asking leave into a separate little kingdom of
wonder and magic--a kingdom that was reserved for the use of others who
had a right to it, with everywhere unwritten warnings to trespassers for
those who had the imagination to discover them.

Though still early in the afternoon, the ceaseless buffetings of a most
tempestuous wind made us feel weary, and we at once began casting about
for a suitable camping-ground for the night. But the bewildering
character of the islands made landing difficult; the swirling flood
carried us in-shore and then swept us out again; the willow branches
tore our hands as we seized them to stop the canoe, and we pulled many a
yard of sandy bank into the water before at length we shot with a great
sideways blow from the wind into a backwater and managed to beach the
bows in a cloud of spray. Then we lay panting and laughing after our
exertions on hot yellow sand, sheltered from the wind, and in the full
blaze of a scorching sun, a cloudless blue sky above, and an immense
army of dancing, shouting willow bushes, closing in from all sides,
shining with spray and clapping their thousand little hands as though to
applaud the success of our efforts.

"What a river!" I said to my companion, thinking of all the way we had
traveled from the source in the Black Forest, and how we had often been
obliged to wade and push in the upper shallows at the beginning of June.

"Won't stand much nonsense now, will it?" he said, pulling the canoe a
little farther into safety up the sand, and then composing himself for a
nap.

I lay by his side, happy and peaceful in the bath of the
elements--water, wind, sand, and the great fire of the sun--thinking of
the long journey that lay behind us, and of the great stretch before us
to the Black Sea, and how lucky I was to have such a delightful and
charming traveling companion as my friend, the Swede.

We had made many similar journeys together, but the Danube, more than
any other river I knew, impressed us from the very beginning with its
_aliveness_. From its tiny bubbling entry into the world among the
pinewood gardens of Donaueschingen, until this moment when it began to
play the great river-game of losing itself among the deserted swamps,
unobserved, unrestrained, it had seemed to us like following the growth
of some living creature. Sleepy at first, but later developing violent
desires as it became conscious of its deep soul, it rolled, like some
huge fluid being, through all the countries we had passed, holding our
little craft on its mighty shoulders, playing roughly with us sometimes,
yet always friendly and well-meaning, till at length we had come
inevitably to regard it as a Great Personage.

How, indeed, could it be otherwise, since it told us so much of its
secret life? At night we heard it singing to the moon as we lay in our
tent, uttering that odd sibilant note peculiar to itself and said to be
caused by the rapid tearing of the pebbles along its bed, so great is
its hurrying speed. We knew, too, the voice of its gurgling whirlpools,
suddenly bubbling up on a surface previously quite calm; the roar of its
shallows and swift rapids; its constant steady thundering below all mere
surface sounds; and that ceaseless tearing of its icy waters at the
banks. How it stood up and shouted when the rains fell flat upon its
face! And how its laughter roared out when the wind blew upstream and
tried to stop its growing speed! We knew all its sounds and voices, its
tumblings and foamings, its unnecessary splashing against the bridges;
that self-conscious chatter when there were hills to look on; the
affected dignity of its speech when it passed through the little towns,
far too important to laugh; and all these faint, sweet whisperings when
the sun caught it fairly in some slow curve and poured down upon it till
the steam rose.

It was full of tricks, too, in its early life before the great world
knew it. There were places in the upper reaches among the Swabian
forests, when yet the first whispers of its destiny had not reached it,
where it elected to disappear through holes in the ground, to appear
again on the other side of the porous limestone hills and start a new
river with another name; leaving, too, so little water in its own bed
that we had to climb out and wade and push the canoe through miles of
shallows!

And a chief pleasure, in those early days of its irresponsible youth,
was to lie low, like Brer Fox, just before the little turbulent
tributaries came to join it from the Alps, and to refuse to acknowledge
them when in, but to run for miles side by side, the dividing line well
marked, the very levels different, the Danube utterly declining to
recognize the new-comer. Below Passau, however, it gave up this
particular trick, for there the Inn comes in with a thundering power
impossible to ignore, and so pushes and incommodes the parent river that
there is hardly room for them in the long twisting gorge that follows,
and the Danube is shoved this way and that against the cliffs, and
forced to hurry itself with great waves and much dashing to and fro in
order to get through in time. And during the fight our canoe slipped
down from its shoulder to its breast, and had the time of its life among
the struggling waves. But the Inn taught the old river a lesson, and
after Passau it no longer pretended to ignore new arrivals.

This was many days back, of course, and since then we had come to know
other aspects of the great creature, and across the Bavarian wheat plain
of Straubing she wandered so slowly under the blazing June sun that we
could well imagine only the surface inches were water, while below there
moved, concealed as by a silken mantle, a whole army of Undines,
passing silently and unseen down to the sea, and very leisurely too,
lest they be discovered.

Much, too, we forgave her because of her friendliness to the birds and
animals that haunted the shores. Cormorants lined the banks in lonely
places in rows like short black palings; gray crows crowded the
shingle-beds; storks stood fishing in the vistas of shallower water that
opened up between the islands, and hawks, swans, and marsh birds of all
sorts filled the air with glinting wings and singing, petulant cries. It
was impossible to feel annoyed with the river's vagaries after seeing a
deer leap with a splash into the water at sunrise and swim past the bows
of the canoe; and often we saw fawns peering at us from the underbrush,
or looked straight into the brown eyes of a stag as we charged full tilt
round a corner and entered another reach of the river. Foxes, too,
everywhere haunted the banks, tripping daintily among the driftwood and
disappearing so suddenly that it was impossible to see how they managed
it.

But now, after leaving Pressburg, everything changed a little, and the
Danube became more serious. It ceased trifling. It was halfway to the
Black Sea, within scenting distance almost of other, stranger countries
where no tricks would be permitted or understood. It became suddenly
grown-up, and claimed our respect and even our awe. It broke out into
three arms, for one thing, that only met again a hundred kilometers
farther down, and for a canoe there were no indications which one was
intended to be followed.

"If you take a side channel," said the Hungarian officer we met in the
Pressburg shop while buying provisions, "you may find yourselves, when
the flood subsides, forty miles from anywhere, high and dry, and you may
easily starve. There are no people, no farms, no fishermen. I warn you
not to continue. The river, too, is still rising, and this wind will
increase."

The rising river did not alarm us in the least, but the matter of being
left high and dry by a sudden subsidence of the waters might be serious,
and we had consequently laid in an extra stock of provisions. For the
rest, the officer's prophecy held true, and the wind, blowing down a
perfectly clear sky, increased steadily till it reached the dignity of a
westerly gale.

It was earlier than usual when we camped, for the sun was a good hour or
two from the horizon, and leaving my friend still asleep on the hot
sand, I wandered about in desultory examination of our hotel. The
island, I found, was less than an acre in extent, a mere sandy bank
standing some two or three feet above the level of the river. The far
end, pointing into the sunset, was covered with flying spray which the
tremendous wind drove off the crests of the broken waves. It was
triangular in shape, with the apex upstream.

I stood there for several minutes, watching the impetuous crimson flood
bearing down with a shouting roar, dashing in waves against the bank as
though to sweep it bodily away, and then swirling by in two foaming
streams on either side. The ground seemed to shake with the shock and
rush while the furious movement of the willow bushes as the wind poured
over them increased the curious illusion that the island itself actually
moved. Above, for a mile or two, I could see the great river descending
upon me: it was like looking up the slope of a sliding hill, white with
foam, and leaping up everywhere to show itself to the sun.

The rest of the island was too thickly grown with willows to make
walking pleasant, but I made the tour, nevertheless. From the lower end
the light, of course, changed, and the river looked dark and angry. Only
the backs of the flying waves were visible, streaked with foam, and
pushed forcibly by the great puffs of wind that fell upon them from
behind. For a short mile it was visible, pouring in and out among the
islands, and then disappearing with a huge sweep into the willows, which
closed about it like a herd of monstrous antediluvian creatures crowding
down to drink. They made me think of gigantic sponge-like growths that
sucked the river up into themselves. They caused it to vanish from
sight. They herded there together in such overpowering numbers.

Altogether it was an impressive scene, with its utter loneliness, its
bizarre suggestion; and as I gazed, long and curiously, a singular
emotion began stir somewhere in the depths of me. Midway in my delight
of the wild beauty, there crept unbidden and unexplained, a curious
feeling of disquietude, almost of alarm.

A rising river, perhaps, always suggests something of the ominous: many
of the little islands I saw before me would probably have been swept
away by the morning; this resistless, thundering flood of water touched
the sense of awe. Yet I was aware that my uneasiness lay deeper far than
the emotions of awe and wonder. It was not that I felt. Nor had it
directly to do with the power of the driving wind--this shouting
hurricane that might almost carry up a few acres of willows into the air
and scatter them like so much chaff over the landscape. The wind was
simply enjoying itself, for nothing rose out of the flat landscape to
stop it, and I was conscious of sharing its great game with a kind of
pleasurable excitement. Yet this novel emotion had nothing to do with
the wind. Indeed, so vague was the sense of distress I experienced, that
it was impossible to trace it to its source and deal with it
accordingly, though I was aware somehow that it had to do with my
realization of our utter insignificance before this unrestrained power
of the elements about me. The huge-grown river had something to do with
it too--a vague, unpleasant idea that we had somehow trifled with these
great elemental forces in whose power we lay helpless every hour of the
day and night. For here, indeed, they were gigantically at play
together, and the sight appealed to the imagination.

But my emotion, so far as I could understand it, seemed to attach itself
more particularly to the willow bushes, to these acres and acres of
willows, crowding, so thickly growing there, swarming everywhere the eye
could reach, pressing upon the river as though to suffocate it, standing
in dense array mile after mile beneath the sky, watching, waiting,
listening. And, apart quite from the elements, the willows connected
themselves subtly with my malaise, attacking the mind insidiously
somehow by reason of their vast numbers, and contriving in some way or
other to represent to the imagination a new and mighty power, a power,
moreover, not altogether friendly to us.

Great revelations of nature, of course, never fail to impress in one way
or another, and I was no stranger to moods of the kind. Mountains
overawe and oceans terrify, while the mystery of great forests exercises
a spell peculiarly its own. But all these, at one point or another,
somewhere link on intimately with human life and human experience. They
stir comprehensible, even if alarming, emotions. They tend on the whole
to exalt.

With this multitude of willows, however, it was something far different,
I felt. Some essence emanated from them that besieged the heart. A sense
of awe awakened, true, but of awe touched somewhere by a vague terror.
Their serried ranks growing everywhere darker about me as the shadows
deepened, moving furiously yet softly in the wind, woke in me the
curious and unwelcome suggestion that we had trespassed here upon the
borders of an alien world, a world where we were intruders, a world
where we were not wanted or invited to remain--where we ran grave risks
perhaps!

The feeling, however, though it refused to yield its meaning entirely to
analysis, did not at the time trouble me by passing into menace. Yet it
never left me quite, even during the very practical business of putting
up the tent in a hurricane of wind and building a fire for the stew-pot.
It remained, just enough to bother and perplex, and to rob a most
delightful camping-ground of a good portion of its charm. To my
companion, however, I said nothing, for he was a man I considered devoid
of imagination. In the first place, I could never have explained to him
what I meant, and in the second, he would have laughed stupidly at me if
I had.

There was a slight depression in the center of the island, and here we
pitched the tent. The surrounding willows broke the wind a bit.

"A poor camp," observed the imperturbable Swede when at last the tent
stood upright; "no stones and precious little firewood. I'm for moving
on early to-morrow--eh? This sand won't hold anything."

But the experience of a collapsing tent at midnight had taught us many
devices, and we made the cosy gipsy house as safe as possible, and then
set about collecting a store of wood to last till bedtime. Willow bushes
drop no branches, and driftwood was our only source of supply. We hunted
the shores pretty thoroughly. Everywhere the banks were crumbling as the
rising flood tore at them and carried away great portions with a splash
and a gurgle.

"The island's much smaller than when we landed," said the accurate
Swede. "It won't last long at this rate. We'd better drag the canoe
close to the tent, and be ready to start at a moment's notice. _I_ shall
sleep in my clothes."

He was a little distance off, climbing along the bank, and I heard his
rather jolly laugh as he spoke.

"By Jove!" I heard him call, a moment later, and turned to see what had
caused his exclamation; but for the moment he was hidden by the willows,
and I could not find him.

"What in the world's this?" I heard him cry again, and this time his
voice had become serious.

I ran up quickly and joined him on the bank. He was looking over the
river, pointing at something in the water.

"Good Heavens, it's a man's body!" he cried excitedly. "Look!"

A black thing, turning over and over in the foaming waves, swept rapidly
past. It kept disappearing and coming up to the surface again. It was
about twenty feet from the shore, and just as it was opposite to where
we stood it lurched round and looked straight at us. We saw its eyes
reflecting the sunset, and gleaming an odd yellow as the body turned
over. Then it gave a swift, gulping plunge, and dived out of sight in a
flash.

"An otter, by gad!" we exclaimed in the same breath, laughing.

It _was_ an otter, alive, and out on the hunt; yet it had looked exactly
like the body of a drowned man turning helplessly in the current. Far
below it came to the surface once again, and we saw its black skin, wet
and shining in the sunlight.

Then, too, just as we turned back, our arms full of driftwood, another
thing happened to recall us to the river bank. This time it really was a
man, and what was more, a man in a boat. Now a small boat on the Danube
was an unusual sight at any time, but here in this deserted region, and
at flood time, it was so unexpected as to constitute a real event. We
stood and stared.

Whether it was due to the slanting sunlight, or the refraction from the
wonderfully illumined water, I cannot say, but, whatever the cause, I
found it difficult to focus my sight properly upon the flying
apparition. It seemed, however, to be a man standing upright in a sort
of flat-bottomed boat, steering with a long oar, and being carried down
the opposite shore at a tremendous pace. He apparently was looking
across in our direction, but the distance was too great and the light
too uncertain for us to make out very plainly what he was about. It
seemed to me that he was gesticulating and making signs at us. His voice
came across the water to us shouting something furiously but the wind
drowned it so that no single word was audible. There was something
curious about the whole appearance--man, boat, signs, voice--that made
an impression on me out of all proportion to its cause.

"He's crossing himself!" I cried. "Look, he's making the sign of the
cross!"

"I believe you're right," the Swede said, shading his eyes with his hand
and watching the man out of sight. He seemed to be gone in a moment,
melting away down there into the sea of willows where the sun caught
them in the bend of the river and turned them into a great crimson wall
of beauty. Mist, too, had begun to rise, so that the air was hazy.

"But what in the world is he doing at nightfall on this flooded river?"
I said, half to myself. "Where is he going at such a time, and what did
he mean by his signs and shouting? D'you think he wished to warn us
about something?"

"He saw our smoke, and thought we were spirits probably," laughed my
companion. "These Hungarians believe in all sorts of rubbish: you
remember the shopwoman at Pressburg warning us that no one ever landed
here because it belonged to some sort of beings outside man's world! I
suppose they believe in fairies and elementals, possibly demons too.
That peasant in the boat saw people on the islands for the first time in
his life," he added, after a slight pause, "and it scared him, that's
all." The Swede's tone of voice was not convincing, and his manner
lacked something that was usually there. I noted the change instantly
while he talked, though without being able to label it precisely.

"If they had enough imagination," I laughed loudly--I remember trying to
make as much _noise_ as I could--"they might well people a place like
this with the old gods of antiquity. The Romans must have haunted all
this region more or less with their shrines and sacred groves and
elemental deities."

The subject dropped and we returned to our stew-pot, for my friend was
not given to imaginative conversation as a rule. Moreover, just then I
remember feeling distinctly glad that he was not imaginative; his
stolid, practical nature suddenly seemed to me welcome and comforting.
It was an admirable temperament, I felt: he could steer down rapids like
a red Indian, shoot dangerous bridges and whirlpools better than any
white man I ever saw in a canoe. He was a grand fellow for an
adventurous trip, a tower of strength when untoward things happened. I
looked at his strong face and light curly hair as he staggered along
under his pile of driftwood (twice the size of mine!), and I experienced
a feeling of relief. Yes, I was distinctly glad just then that the Swede
was--what he was, and that he never made remarks that suggested more
than they said.

"The river's still rising, though," he added, as if following out some
thoughts of his own, and dropping his load with a gasp. "This island
will be under water in two days if it goes on."

"I wish the _wind_ would go down," I said. "I don't care a fig for the
river."

The flood, indeed, had no terrors for us; we could get off at ten
minutes' notice, and the more water the better we liked it. It meant an
increasing current and the obliteration of the treacherous shingle-beds
that so often threatened to tear the bottom out of our canoe.

Contrary to our expectations, the wind did not go down with the sun. It
seemed to increase with the darkness, howling overhead and shaking the
willows round us like straws. Curious sounds accompanied it sometimes,
like the explosion of heavy guns, and it fell upon the water and the
island in great flat blows of immense power. It made me think of the
sounds a planet must make, could we only hear it, driving along through
space.

But the sky kept wholly clear of clouds, and soon after supper the full
moon rose up in the east and covered the river and the plain of shouting
willows with a light like the day.

We lay on the sandy patch beside the fire, smoking, listening to the
noises of the night round us, and talking happily of the journey we had
already made, and of our plans ahead. The map lay spread in the door of
the tent, but the high wind made it hard to study, and presently we
lowered the curtain and extinguished the lantern. The firelight was
enough to smoke and see each other's faces by, and the sparks flew about
overhead like fireworks. A few yards beyond, the river gurgled and
hissed, and from time to time a heavy splash announced the falling away
of further portions of the bank.

Our talk, I noticed, had to do with the far-away scenes and incidents of
our first camps in the Black Forest, or of other subjects altogether
remote from the present setting, for neither of us spoke of the actual
moment more than was necessary--almost as though we had agreed tacitly
to avoid discussion of the camp and its incidents. Neither the otter nor
the boatman, for instance, received the honor of a single mention,
though ordinarily these would have furnished discussion for the greater
part of the evening. They were, of course, distinct events in such a
place.

The scarcity of wood made it a business to keep the fire going, for the
wind, that drove the smoke in our faces wherever we sat, helped at the
same time to make a forced draught. We took it in turn to make foraging
expeditions into the darkness, and the quantity the Swede brought back
always made me feel that he took an absurdly long time finding it; for
the fact was I did not care much about being left alone, and yet it
always seemed to be my turn to grub about among the bushes or scramble
along the slippery banks in the moonlight. The long day's battle with
wind and water--such wind and such water!--had tired us both, and an
early bed was the obvious program. Yet neither of us made the move for
the tent. We lay there, tending the fire, talking in desultory fashion,
peering about us into the dense willow bushes, and listening to the
thunder of wind and river. The loneliness of the place had entered our
very bones, and silence seemed natural, for after a bit the sound of our
voices became a trifle unreal and forced; whispering would have been the
fitting mode of communication, I felt, and the human voice, always
rather absurd amid the roar of the elements, now carried with it
something almost illegitimate. It was like talking out loud in church,
or in some place where it was not lawful, perhaps not quite _safe_, to
be overheard.

The eeriness of this lonely island, set among a million willows, swept
by a hurricane, and surrounded by hurrying deep waters, touched us both,
I fancy. Untrodden by man, almost unknown to man, it lay there beneath
the moon, remote from human influence, on the frontier of another world,
an alien world, a world tenanted by willows only and the souls of
willows. And we, in our rashness, had dared to invade it, even to make
use of it! Something more than the power of its mystery stirred in me as
I lay on the sand, feet to fire, and peered up through the leaves at the
stars. For the last time I rose to get firewood.

"When this has burnt up," I said firmly, "I shall turn in," and my
companion watched me lazily as I moved off into the surrounding
shadows.

For an unimaginative man I thought he seemed unusually receptive that
night, unusually open to suggestion of things other than sensory. He too
was touched by the beauty and loneliness of the place. I was not
altogether pleased, I remember, to recognize this slight change in him,
and instead of immediately collecting sticks, I made my way to the far
point of the island where the moonlight on plain and river could be seen
to better advantage. The desire to be alone had come suddenly upon me;
my former dread returned in force; there was a vague feeling in me I
wished to face and probe to the bottom.

When I reached the point of sand jutting out among the waves, the spell
of the place descended upon me with a positive shock. No mere "scenery"
could have produced such an effect. There was something more here,
something to alarm.

I gazed across the waste of wild waters; I watched the whispering
willows; I heard the ceaseless beating of the tireless wind; and, one
and all, each in its own way, stirred in me this sensation of a strange
distress. But the _willows_ especially: for ever they went on chattering
and talking among themselves, laughing a little, shrilly crying out,
sometimes sighing--but what it was they made so much to-do about
belonged to the secret life of the great plain they inhabited. And it
was utterly alien to the world I knew, or to that of the wild yet
kindly elements. They made me think of a host of beings from another
plane of life, another evolution altogether, perhaps, all discussing a
mystery known only to themselves. I watched them moving busily together,
oddly shaking their big bushy heads, twirling their myriad leaves even
when there was no wind. They moved of their own will as though alive,
and they touched, by some incalculable method, my own keen sense of the
_horrible_.

There they stood in the moonlight, like a vast army surrounding our
camp, shaking their innumerable silver spears defiantly, formed all
ready for an attack.

The psychology of places, for some imaginations at least, is very vivid;
for the wanderer, especially, camps have their "note" either of welcome
or rejection. At first it may not always be apparent, because the busy
preparations of tent and cooking prevent, but with the first
pause--after supper usually--it comes and announces itself. And the note
of this willow-camp now became unmistakably plain to me: we were
interlopers, trespassers, we were not welcomed. The sense of
unfamiliarity grew upon me as I stood there watching. We touched the
frontier of a region where our presence was resented. For a night's
lodging we might perhaps be tolerated; but for a prolonged and
inquisitive stay--No! by all the gods of the trees and the wilderness,
no! We were the first human influences upon this island, and we were not
wanted. _The willows were against us_.

Strange thoughts like these, bizarre fancies, borne I know not whence,
found lodgment in my mind as I stood listening. What, I thought, if,
after all, these crouching willows proved to be alive; if suddenly they
should rise up, like a swarm of living creatures, marshaled by the gods
whose territory we had invaded, sweep towards us off the vast swamps,
booming overhead in the night--and then _settle down_! As I looked it
was so easy to imagine they actually moved, crept nearer, retreated a
little, huddled together in masses, hostile, waiting for the great wind
that should finally start them a-running. I could have sworn their
aspect changed a little, and their ranks deepened and pressed more
closely together.

The melancholy shrill cry of a night bird sounded overhead, and suddenly
I nearly lost my balance as the piece of bank I stood upon fell with a
great splash into the river, undermined by the flood. I stepped back
just in time, and went on hunting for firewood again, half laughing at
the odd fancies that crowded so thickly into my mind and cast their
spell upon me. I recall the Swede's remark about moving on next day, and
I was just thinking that I fully agreed with him, when I turned with a
start and saw the subject of my thoughts standing immediately in front
of me. He was quite close. The roar of the elements had covered his
approach.

"You've been gone so long," he shouted above the wind, "I thought
something must have happened to you."

But there was that in his tone, and a certain look in his face as well,
that conveyed to me more than his actual words, and in a flash I
understood the real reason for his coming. It was because the spell of
the place had entered his soul too, and he did not like being alone.

"River still rising," he cried, pointing to the flood in the moonlight,
"and the wind's simply awful."

He always said the same things, but it was the cry for companionship
that gave the real importance to his words.

"Lucky," I cried back, "our tent's in the hollow. I think it'll hold all
right." I added something about the difficulty of finding wood, in order
to explain my absence, but the wind caught my words and flung them
across the river, so that he did not hear, but just looked at me through
the branches, nodding his head.

"Lucky if we get away without disaster!" he shouted, or words to that
effect; and I remember feeling half angry with him for putting the
thought into words, for it was exactly what I felt myself. There was
disaster impending somewhere, and the sense of presentiment lay
unpleasantly upon me.

We went back to the fire and made a final blaze, poking it up with our
feet. We took a last look round. But for the wind the heat would have
been unpleasant. I put this thought into words, and I remember my
friend's reply struck me oddly: that he would rather have the heat, the
ordinary July weather, than this "diabolical wind."

Everything was snug for the night; the canoe lying turned over beside
the tent, with both yellow paddles beneath her; the provision sack
hanging from a willow stem, and the washed-up dishes removed to a safe
distance from the fire, all ready for the morning meal.

We smothered the embers of the fire with sand, and then turned in. The
flap of the tent door was up, and I saw the branches and the stars and
the white moonlight. The shaking willows and the heavy buffetings of the
wind against our taut little house were the last things I remembered as
sleep came down and covered all with its soft and delicious
forgetfulness.


II

Suddenly I found myself lying awake, peering from my sandy mattress
through the door of the tent. I looked at my watch pinned against the
canvas, and saw by the bright moonlight that it was past twelve
o'clock--the threshold of a new day--and I had therefore slept a couple
of hours. The Swede was asleep still beside me; the wind howled as
before something plucked at my heart and made me feel afraid. There was
a sense of disturbance in my immediate neighborhood.

I sat up quickly and looked out. The trees were swaying violently to and
fro as the gusts smote them, but our little bit of green canvas lay
snugly safe in the hollow, for the wind passed over it without meeting
enough resistance to make it vicious. The feeling of disquietude did not
pass however, and I crawled quietly out of the tent to see if our
belongings were safe. I moved carefully so as not to waken my companion.
A curious excitement was on me.

I was halfway out, kneeling on all fours, when my eye first took in that
the tops of the bushes opposite, with their moving tracery of leaves,
made shapes against the sky. I sat back on my haunches and stared. It
was incredible, surely, but there, opposite and slightly above me, were
shapes of some indeterminate sort among the willows, and as the branches
swayed in the wind they seemed to group themselves about these shapes,
forming a series of monstrous outlines that shifted rapidly beneath the
moon. Close, about fifty feet in front of me, I saw these things.

My first instinct was to waken my companion that he too might see them,
but something made me hesitate--the sudden realization, probably, that I
should not welcome corroboration; and meanwhile I crouched there staring
in amazement with smarting eyes. I was wide awake. I remember saying to
myself that I was _not_ dreaming.

They first became properly visible, these huge figures, just within the
tops of the bushes--immense bronze-colored, moving, and wholly
independent of the swaying of the branches. I saw them plainly and
noted, now I came to examine them more calmly, that they were very much
larger than human, and indeed that something in their appearance
proclaimed them to be _not human_ at all. Certainly they were not merely
the moving tracery of the branches against the moonlight. They shifted
independently. They rose upwards in a continuous stream from earth to
sky, vanishing utterly as soon as they reached the dark of the sky. They
were interlaced one with another, making a great column, and I saw their
limbs and huge bodies melting in and out of each other, forming this
serpentine line that bent and swayed and twisted spirally with the
contortions of the wind-tossed trees. They were nude, fluid shapes,
passing up the bushes, _within_ the leaves almost--rising up in a living
column into the heavens. Their faces I never could see. Unceasingly they
poured upwards, swaying in great bending curves, with a hue of dull
bronze upon their skins.

I stared, trying to force every atom of vision from my eyes. For a long
time I thought they _must_ every moment disappear and resolve themselves
into the movements of the branches and prove to be an optical illusion.
I searched everywhere for a proof of reality, when all the while I
understood quite well that the standard of reality had changed. For the
longer I looked the more certain I became that these figures were real
and living, though perhaps not according to the standards that the
camera and the biologist would insist upon.

Far from feeling fear, I was possessed with a sense of awe and wonder
such as I have never known. I seemed to be gazing at the personified
elemental forces of this haunted and primeval region. Our intrusion had
stirred the powers of the place into activity. It was we who were the
cause of the disturbance, and my brain filled to bursting with stories
and legends of the spirits and deities of places that have been
acknowledged and worshiped by men in all ages of the world's history.
But, before I could arrive at any possible explanation, something
impelled me to go farther out, and I crept forward on to the sand and
stood upright. I felt the ground still warm under my bare feet; the wind
tore at my hair and face; and the sound of the river burst upon my ears
with a sudden roar. These things, I knew, were real, and proved that my
senses were acting normally. Yet the figures still rose from earth to
heaven, silent, majestically, in a great spiral of grace and strength
that overwhelmed me at length with a genuine deep emotion of worship. I
felt that I must fall down and worship--absolutely worship.

Perhaps in another minute I might have done so, when a gust of wind
swept against me with such force that it blew me sideways, and I nearly
stumbled and fell. It seemed to shake the dream violently out of me. At
least it gave me another point of view somehow. The figures still
remained, still ascended into heaven from the heart of the night, but my
reason at last began to assert itself. It must be a subjective
experience, I argued--none the less real for that, but still subjective.
The moonlight and the branches combined to work out these pictures upon
the mirror of my imagination, and for some reason I projected them
outwards and made them appear objective. I knew this must be the case,
of course. I was the subject of a vivid and interesting hallucination. I
took courage, and began to move forward across the open patches of sand.
By Jove, though, was it all hallucination? Was it merely subjective? Did
not my reason argue in the old futile way from the little standard of
the known?

I only know that great column of figures ascended darkly into the sky
for what seemed a very long period of time, and with a very complete
measure of reality as most men are accustomed to gauge reality. Then
suddenly they were gone!

And, once they were gone and the immediate wonder of their great
presence had passed, fear came down upon me with a cold rush. The
esoteric meaning of this lonely and haunted region suddenly flamed up
within me and I began to tremble dreadfully. I took a quick look
round--a look of horror that came near to panic--calculating vainly ways
of escape; and then, realizing how helpless I was to achieve anything
really effective, I crept back silently into the tent and lay down again
upon my sandy mattress, first lowering the door-curtain to shut out the
sight of the willows in the moonlight, and then burying my head as
deeply as possible beneath the blankets to deaden the sound of the
terrifying wind.


III

As though further to convince me that I had not been dreaming, I
remember that it was a long time before I fell again into a troubled and
restless sleep; and even then only the upper crust of me slept, and
underneath there was something that never quite lost consciousness, but
lay alert and on the watch.

But this second time I jumped up with a genuine start of terror. It was
neither the wind nor the river that woke me, but the slow approach of
something that caused the sleeping portion of me to grow smaller and
smaller till at last it vanished altogether, and I found myself sitting
bolt upright--listening.

Outside there was a sound of multitudinous little patterings. They had
been coming, I was aware, for a long time, and in my sleep they had
first become audible. I sat there nervously wide awake as though I had
not slept at all. It seemed to me that my breathing came with
difficulty, and that there was a great weight upon the surface of my
body. In spite of the hot night, I felt clammy with cold and shivered.
Something surely was pressing steadily against the sides of the tent and
weighing down upon it from above. Was it the body of the wind? Was this
the pattering rain, the dripping of the leaves? The spray blown from
the river by the wind and gathering in big drops? I thought quickly of a
dozen things.

Then suddenly the explanation leaped into my mind: a bough from the
poplar, the only large tree on the island, had fallen with the wind.
Still half caught by the other branches, it would fall with the next
gust and crush us, and meanwhile its leaves brushed and tapped upon the
tight canvas surface of the tent. I raised the loose flap and rushed
out, calling to the Swede to follow.

But when I got out and stood upright I saw that the tent was free. There
was no hanging bough; there was no rain or spray; nothing approached.

A cold, gray light filtered down through the bushes and lay on the
faintly gleaming sand. Stars still crowded the sky directly overhead,
and the wind howled magnificently, but the fire no longer gave out any
glow, and I saw the east reddening in streaks through the trees. Several
hours must have passed since I stood there before, watching the
ascending figures, and the memory of it now came back to me horribly,
like an evil dream. Oh, how tired it made me feel, that ceaseless raging
wind! Yet, though the deep lassitude of a sleepless night was on me, my
nerves were tingling with the activity of an equally tireless
apprehension, and all idea of repose was out of the question. The river
I saw had risen further. Its thunder filled the air, and a fine spray
made itself felt through my thin sleeping shirt.

Yet nowhere did I discover the slightest evidences of anything to cause
alarm. This deep, prolonged disturbance in my heart remained wholly
unaccounted for.

My companion had not stirred when I called him, and there was no need to
waken him now. I looked about me carefully, noting everything: the
turned-over canoe; the yellow paddles--two of them, I'm certain; the
provision sack and the extra lantern hanging together from the tree;
and, crowding everywhere about me, enveloping all, the willows, those
endless, shaking willows. A bird uttered its morning cry, and a string
of duck passed with whirring flight overhead in the twilight. The sand
whirled, dry and stinging, about my bare feet in the wind.

I walked round the tent and then went out a little way into the bush, so
that I could see across the river to the farther landscape, and the same
profound yet indefinable emotion of distress seized upon me again as I
saw the interminable sea of bushes stretching to the horizon, looking
ghostly and unreal in the wan light of dawn. I walked softly here and
there, still puzzling over that odd sound of infinite pattering, and of
that pressure upon the tent that had wakened me. It _must_ have been the
wind, I reflected--the wind beating upon the loose, hot sand, driving
the dry particles smartly against the taut canvas--the wind dropping
heavily upon our fragile roof.

Yet all the time my nervousness and malaise increased appreciably.

I crossed over to the farther shore and noted how the coast line had
altered in the night, and what masses of sand the river had torn away. I
dipped my hands and feet into the cool current, and bathed my forehead.
Already there was a glow of sunrise in the sky and the exquisite
freshness of coming day. On my way back I passed purposely beneath the
very bushes where I had seen the column of figures rising into the air,
and midway among the clumps I suddenly found myself overtaken by a sense
of vast terror. From the shadows a large figure went swiftly by. Some
one passed me, as sure as ever man did....

It was a great staggering blow from the wind that helped me forward
again, and once out in the more open space, the sense of terror
diminished strangely. The winds were about and walking, I remember
saying to myself; for the winds often move like great presences under
the trees. And altogether the fear that hovered about me was such an
unknown and immense kind of fear, so unlike anything I had ever felt
before, that it woke a sense of awe and wonder in me that did much to
counteract its worst effects; and when I reached a high point in the
middle of the island from which I could see the wide stretch of river,
crimson in the sunrise, the whole magical beauty of it all was so
overpowering that a sort of wild yearning woke in me and almost brought
a cry up into the throat.

But this cry found no expression, for as my eyes wandered from the plain
beyond to the island round me and noted our little tent half hidden
among the willows, a dreadful discovery leaped out at me, compared to
which my terror of the walking winds seemed as nothing at all.

For a change, I thought, had somehow come about in the arrangement of
the landscape. It was not that my point of vantage gave me a different
view, but that an alteration had apparently been effected in the
relation of the tent to the willows, and of the willows to the tent.
Surely the bushes now crowded much closer--unnecessarily, unpleasantly
close. _They had moved nearer_.

Creeping with silent feet over the shifting sands, drawing imperceptibly
nearer by soft, unhurried movements, the willows had come closer during
the night. But had the wind moved them, or had they moved of themselves?
I recalled the sound of infinite small patterings and the pressure upon
the tent and upon my own heart that caused me to wake in terror. I
swayed for a moment in the wind like a tree, finding it hard to keep my
upright position on the sandy hillock. There was a suggestion here of
personal agency, of deliberate intention, of aggressive hostility, and
it terrified me into a sort of rigidity.

Then the reaction followed quickly. The idea was so bizarre, so absurd,
that I felt inclined to laugh. But the laughter came no more readily
than the cry, for the knowledge that my mind was so receptive to such
dangerous imaginings brought the additional terror that it was through
our minds and not through our physical bodies that the attack would
come, and was coming.

The wind buffeted me about, and, very quickly it seemed, the sun came up
over the horizon, for it was after four o'clock, and I must have stood
on that little pinnacle of sand longer than I knew, afraid to come down
at close quarters with the willows. I returned quietly, creepily, to the
tent, first taking another exhaustive look round and--yes, I confess
it--making a few measurements. I paced out on the warm sand the
distances between the willows and the tent, making a note of the
shortest distance particularly.

I crawled stealthily into my blankets. My companion, to all appearances,
still slept soundly, and I was glad that this was so. Provided my
experiences were not corroborated, I could find strength somehow to deny
them, perhaps. With the daylight I could persuade myself that it was all
a subjective hallucination, a fantasy of the night, a projection of the
excited imagination.

Nothing further came to disturb me, and I fell asleep almost at once,
utterly exhausted, yet still in dread of hearing again that weird sound
of multitudinous pattering, or of feeling the pressure upon my heart
that had made it difficult to breathe.


IV

The sun was high in the heavens when my companion woke me from a heavy
sleep and announced that the porridge was cooked and there was just
time to bathe. The grateful smell of frizzling bacon entered the tent
door.

"River still rising," he said, "and several islands out in midstream
have disappeared altogether. Our own island's much smaller."

"Any wood left?" I asked sleepily.

"The wood and the island will finish to-morrow in a dead heat," he
laughed, "but there's enough to last us till then."

I plunged in from the point of the island, which had indeed altered a
lot in size and shape during the night, and was swept down in a moment
to the landing place opposite the tent. The water was icy, and the banks
flew by like the country from an express train. Bathing under such
conditions was an exhilarating operation, and the terror of the night
seemed cleansed out of me by a process of evaporation in the brain. The
sun was blazing hot; not a cloud showed itself anywhere; the wind,
however, had not abated one little jot.

Quite suddenly then the implied meaning of the Swede's words flashed
across me, showing that he no longer wished to leave posthaste, and had
changed his mind. "Enough to last till to-morrow"--he assumed we should
stay on the island another night. It struck me as odd. The night before
he was so positive the other way. How had the change come about?

Great crumblings of the banks occurred at breakfast, with heavy
splashings and clouds of spray which the wind brought into our
frying-pan, and my fellow-traveler talked incessantly about the
difficulty the Vienna-Pesth steamers must have to find the channel in
flood. But the state of his mind interested and impressed me far more
than the state of the river or the difficulties of the steamers. He had
changed somehow since the evening before. His manner was different--a
trifle excited, a trifle shy, with a sort of suspicion about his voice
and gestures. I hardly know how to describe it now in cold blood, but at
the time I remember being quite certain of one thing, viz., that he had
become frightened!

He ate very little breakfast, and for once omitted to smoke his pipe. He
had the map spread open beside him, and kept studying its markings.

"We'd better get off sharp in an hour," I said presently, feeling for an
opening that must bring him indirectly to a partial confession at any
rate. And his answer puzzled me uncomfortably: "Rather! If they'll let
us."

"Who'll let us? The elements?" I asked quickly, with affected
indifference.

"The powers of this awful place, whoever they are," he replied, keeping
his eyes on the map. "The gods are here, if they are anywhere at all in
the world."

"The elements are always the true immortals," I replied, laughing as
naturally as I could manage, yet knowing quite well that my face
reflected my true feelings when he looked up gravely at me and spoke
across the smoke:

"We shall be fortunate if we get away without further disaster."

This was exactly what I had dreaded, and I screwed myself up to the
point of the direct question. It was like agreeing to allow the dentist
to extract the tooth; it _had_ to come anyhow in the long run, and the
rest was all pretense.

"Further disaster! Why, what's happened?"

"For one thing--the steering paddle's gone," he said quietly.

"The steering paddle gone!" I repeated, greatly excited, for this was
our rudder, and the Danube in flood without a rudder was suicide. "But
what----"

"And there's a tear in the bottom of the canoe," he added, with a
genuine little tremor in his voice.

I continued staring at him, able only to repeat the words in his face
somewhat foolishly. There, in the heat of the sun, and on this burning
sand, I was aware of a freezing atmosphere descending round us. I got up
to follow him, for he merely nodded his head gravely and led the way
towards the tent a few yards on the other side of the fireplace. The
canoe still lay there as I had last seen her in the night, ribs
uppermost, the paddles, or rather, _the_ paddle, on the sand beside her.

"There's only one," he said, stooping to pick it up. "And here's the
rent in the base-board."

It was on the tip of my tongue to tell him that I had clearly noticed
_two_ paddles a few hours before, but a second impulse made me think
better of it, and I said nothing. I approached to see.

There was a long, finely made tear in the bottom of the canoe where a
little slither of wood had been neatly taken clean out; it looked as if
the tooth of a sharp rock or snag had eaten down her length, and
investigation showed that the hole went through. Had we launched out in
her without observing it we must inevitably have foundered. At first the
water would have made the wood swell so as to close the hole, but once
out in midstream the water must have poured in, and the canoe, never
more than two inches above the surface, would have filled and sunk very
rapidly.

"There, you see, an attempt to prepare a victim for the sacrifice," I
heard him saying, more to himself than to me, "two victims rather," he
added as he bent over and ran his fingers along the slit.

I began to whistle--a thing I always do unconsciously when utterly
nonplused--and purposely paid no attention to his words. I was
determined to consider them foolish.

"It wasn't there last night," he said presently, straightening up from
his examination and looking anywhere but at me.

"We must have scratched her in landing, of course," I stopped whistling
to say, "The stones are very sharp----"

I stopped abruptly, for at that moment he turned round and met my eye
squarely. I knew just as well as he did how impossible my explanation
was. There were no stones, to begin with.

"And then there's this to explain too," he added quietly, handing me the
paddle and pointing to the blade.

A new and curious emotion spread freezingly over me as I took and
examined it. The blade was scraped down all over, beautifully scraped,
as though someone had sand-papered it with care, making it so thin that
the first vigorous stroke must have snapped it off at the elbow.

"One of us walked in his sleep and did this thing," I said feebly,
"or--or it has been filed by the constant stream of sand particles blown
against it by the wind, perhaps."

"Ah," said the Swede, turning away, laughing a little, "you can explain
everything!"

"The same wind that caught the steering paddle and flung it so near the
bank that it fell in with the next lump that crumbled," I called out
after him, absolutely determined to find an explanation for everything
he showed me.

"I see," he shouted back, turning his head to look at me before
disappearing among the willow bushes.

Once alone with these perplexing evidences of personal agency, I think
my first thought took the form of "One of us must have done this thing,
and it certainly was not I." But my second thought decided how
impossible it was to suppose, under all the circumstances, that either
of us had done it. That my companion, the trusted friend of a dozen
similar expeditions, could have knowingly had a hand in it, was a
suggestion not to be entertained for a moment. Equally absurd seemed the
explanation that this imperturbable and densely practical nature had
suddenly become insane and was busied with insane purposes.

Yet the fact remained that what disturbed me most, and kept my fear
actively alive even in this blaze of sunshine and wild beauty, was the
clear certainty that some curious alteration had come about in his
_mind_--that he was nervous, timid, suspicious, aware of goings on he
did not speak about, watching a series of secret and hitherto
unmentionable events--waiting, in a word, for a climax that he expected,
and, I thought, expected very soon. This grew up in my mind
intuitively--I hardly knew how.

I made a hurried examination of the tent and its surroundings, but the
measurements of the night remained the same. There were deep hollows
formed in the sand, I now noticed for the first time, basin-shaped and
of various depths and sizes, varying from that of a teacup to a large
bowl. The wind, no doubt, was responsible for these miniature craters,
just as it was for lifting the paddle and tossing it towards the water.
The rent in the canoe was the only thing that seemed quite inexplicable;
and, after all, it _was_ conceivable that a sharp point had caught it
when we landed. The examination I made of the shore did not assist this
theory, but all the same I clung to it with that diminishing portion of
my intelligence which I called my "reason." An explanation of some kind
was an absolute necessity, just as some working explanation of the
universe is necessary--however absurd--to the happiness of every
individual who seeks to do his duty in the world and face the problems
of life. The simile seemed to me at the time an exact parallel.

I at once set the pitch melting, and presently the Swede joined me at
the work, though under the best conditions in the world the canoe could
not be safe for traveling till the following day. I drew his attention
casually to the hollows in the sand.

"Yes," he said, "I know. They're all over the island. But _you_ can
explain them, no doubt!"

"Wind, of course," I answered without hesitation. "Have you never
watched those little whirlwinds in the street that twist and twirl
everything into a circle? This sand's loose enough to yield, that's
all."

He made no reply, and we worked on in silence for a bit. I watched him
surreptitiously all the time, and I had an idea he was watching me. He
seemed, too, to be always listening attentively to something I could not
hear, or perhaps for something that he expected to hear, for he kept
turning about and staring into the bushes, and up into the sky, and out
across the water where it was visible through the openings among the
willows. Sometimes he even put his hand to his ear and held it there for
several minutes. He said nothing to me, however, about it, and I asked
no questions. And meanwhile, as he mended that torn canoe with the skill
and address of a red Indian, I was glad to notice his absorption in the
work, for there was a vague dread in my heart that he would speak of the
changed aspect of the willows. And, if he had noticed _that_, my
imagination could no longer be held a sufficient explanation of it.

At length, after a long pause, he began to talk.

"Queer thing," he added in a hurried sort of voice, as though he wanted
to say something and get it over. "Queer thing, I mean, about that otter
last night."

I had expected something so totally different that he caught me with
surprise, and I looked up sharply.

"Shows how lonely this place is. Otters are awfully shy things--"

"I don't mean that, of course," he interrupted. "I mean--do you
think--did you think it really was an otter?"

"What else, in the name of Heaven, what else?"

"You know, I saw it before you did, and at first it seemed--so _much_
bigger than an otter."

"The sunset as you looked upstream magnified it, or something," I
replied.

He looked at me absently a moment, as though his mind were busy with
other thoughts.

"It had such extraordinary yellow eyes," he went on half to himself.

"That was the sun too," I laughed, a trifle boisterously. "I suppose
you'll wonder next if that fellow in the boat----"

I suddenly decided not to finish the sentence. He was in the act again
of listening, turning his head to the wind, and something in the
expression of his face made me halt. The subject dropped, and we went on
with our caulking. Apparently he had not noticed my unfinished sentence.
Five minutes later, however, he looked at me across the canoe, the
smoking pitch in his hand, his face exceedingly grave.

"I _did_ rather wonder, if you want to know," he said slowly, "what that
thing in the boat was. I remember thinking at the time it was not a man.
The whole business seemed to rise quite suddenly out of the water."

I laughed again boisterously in his face, but this time there was
impatience and a strain of anger too, in my feeling.

"Look here now," I cried, "this place is quite queer enough without
going out of our way to imagine things! That boat was an ordinary boat,
and the man in it was an ordinary man, and they were both going
downstream as fast as they could lick. And that otter _was_ an otter, so
don't let's play the fool about it!"

He looked steadily at me with the same grave expression. He was not in
the least annoyed. I took courage from his silence.

"And for heaven's sake," I went on, "don't keep pretending you hear
things, because it only gives me the jumps, and there's nothing to hear
but the river and this cursed old thundering wind."

"You _fool_!" he answered in a low, shocked voice, "you utter fool.
That's just the way all victims talk. As if you didn't understand just
as well as I do!" he sneered with scorn in his voice, and a sort of
resignation. "The best thing you can do is to keep quiet and try to hold
your mind as firm as possible. This feeble attempt at self-deception
only makes the truth harder when you're forced to meet it."

My little effort was over, and I found nothing more to say, for I knew
quite well his words were true, and that I was the fool, not _he_. Up to
a certain stage in the adventure he kept ahead of me easily, and I think
I felt annoyed to be out of it, to be thus proved less psychic, less
sensitive than himself to these extraordinary happenings, and half
ignorant all the time of what was going on under my very nose. _He knew_
from the very beginning, apparently. But at the moment I wholly missed
the point of his words about the necessity of there being a victim, and
that we ourselves were destined to satisfy the want. I dropped all
pretense thenceforward, but thenceforward likewise my fear increased
steadily to the climax.

"But you're quite right about one thing," he added, before the subject
passed, "and that is that we're wiser not to talk about it, or even to
think about it, because what one _thinks_ finds expression in words, and
what one _says_, happens."

That afternoon, while the canoe dried and hardened, we spent trying to
fish, testing the leak, collecting wood, and watching the enormous flood
of rising water. Masses of driftwood swept near our shores sometimes,
and we fished for them with long willow branches. The island grew
perceptibly smaller as the banks were torn away with great gulps and
splashes. The weather kept brilliantly fine till about four o'clock, and
then for the first time for three days the wind showed signs of abating.
Clouds began to gather in the southwest, spreading thence slowly over
the sky.

This lessening of the wind came as a great relief, for the incessant
roaring, banging, and thundering had irritated our nerves. Yet the
silence that came about five o'clock with its sudden cessation was in a
manner quite as oppressive. The booming of the river had everything its
own way then: it filled the air with deep murmurs, more musical than the
wind noises, but infinitely more monotonous. The wind held many notes,
rising, falling, always beating out some sort of great elemental tune;
whereas the river's song lay between three notes at most--dull pedal
notes, that held a lugubrious quality foreign to the wind, and somehow
seemed to me, in my then nervous state, to sound wonderfully well the
music of doom.

It was extraordinary, too, how the withdrawal suddenly of bright
sunlight took everything out of the landscape that made for
cheerfulness; and since this particular landscape had already managed to
convey the suggestion of something sinister, the change of course was
all the more unwelcome and noticeable. For me, I know, the darkening
outlook became distinctly more alarming, and I found myself more than
once calculating how soon after sunset the full moon would get up in the
east, and whether the gathering clouds would greatly interfere with her
lighting of the little island.

With this general hush of the wind--though it still indulged in
occasional brief gusts--the river seemed to me to grow blacker, the
willows to stand more densely together. The latter, too, kept up a sort
of independent movement of their own, rustling among themselves when no
wind stirred, and shaking oddly from the roots upwards. When common
objects in this way become charged with the suggestion of horror, they
stimulate the imagination far more than things of unusual appearance;
and these bushes, crowding huddled about us, assumed for me in the
darkness a bizarre _grotesquerie_ of appearance that lent to them
somehow the aspect of purposeful and living creatures. Their very
ordinariness, I felt, masked what was malignant and hostile to us. The
forces of the region drew nearer with the coming of night. They were
focusing upon our island, and more particularly upon ourselves. For
thus, somehow, in the terms of the imagination, did my really
indescribable sensations in this extraordinary place present themselves.

I had slept a good deal in the early afternoon, and had thus recovered
somewhat from the exhaustion of a disturbed night, but this only served
apparently to render me more susceptible than before to the obsessing
spell of the haunting. I fought against it, laughing at my feelings as
absurd and childish, with very obvious physiological explanations, yet,
in spite of every effort, they gained in strength upon me so that I
dreaded the night as a child lost in a forest must dread the approach of
darkness.

The canoe we had carefully covered with a waterproof sheet during the
day, and the one remaining paddle had been securely tied by the Swede to
the base of a tree, lest the wind should rob us of that too. From five
o'clock onwards I busied myself with the stew-pot and preparations for
dinner, it being my turn to cook that night. We had potatoes, onions,
bits of bacon fat to add flavour, and a general thick residue from
former stews at the bottom of the pot; with black bread broken up into
it the result was most excellent, and it was followed by a stew of plums
with sugar and a brew of strong tea with dried milk. A good pile of wood
lay close at hand, and the absence of wind made my duties easy. My
companion sat lazily watching me, dividing his attentions between
cleaning his pipe and giving useless advice--an admitted privilege of
the off-duty man. He had been very quiet all the afternoon, engaged in
re-caulking the canoe, strengthening the tent ropes, and fishing for
driftwood while I slept. No more talk about undesirable things had
passed between us, and I think his only remarks had to do with the
gradual destruction of the island, which he declared was now fully a
third smaller than when we first landed.

The pot had just begun to bubble when I heard his voice calling to me
from the bank, where he had wandered away without my noticing. I ran up.

"Come and listen," he said, "and see what you make of it." He held his
hand cupwise to his ear, as so often before.

"_Now_ do you hear anything?" he asked, watching me curiously.

We stood there, listening attentively together. At first I heard only
the deep note of the water and the hissings rising from its turbulent
surface. The willows, for once, were motionless and silent. Then a sound
began to reach my ears faintly, a peculiar sound--something like the
humming of a distant gong. It seemed to come across to us in the
darkness from the waste of swamps and willows opposite. It was repeated
at regular intervals, but it was certainly neither the sound of a bell
nor the hooting of a distant steamer. I can liken it to nothing so much
as to the sound of an immense gong, suspended far up in the sky,
repeating incessantly its muffled metallic note, soft and musical, as
it was repeatedly struck. My heart quickened as I listened.

"I've heard it all day," said my companion. "While you slept this
afternoon it came all round the island. I hunted it down, but could
never get near enough to see--to localize it correctly. Sometimes it was
overhead, and sometimes it seemed under the water. Once or twice, too, I
could have sworn it was not outside at all, but _within myself_--you
know--the way a sound in the fourth dimension is supposed to come."

I was too much puzzled to pay much attention to his words. I listened
carefully, striving to associate it with any known familiar sound I
could think of, but without success. It changed in direction, too,
coming nearer, and then sinking utterly away into remote distance. I
cannot say that it was ominous in quality, because to me it seemed
distinctly musical, yet I must admit it set going a distressing feeling
that made me wish I had never heard it.

"The wind blowing in those sand-funnels," I said, determined to find an
explanation, "or the bushes rubbing together after the storm perhaps."

"It comes off the whole swamp," my friend answered. "It comes from
everywhere at once." He ignored my explanations. "It comes from the
willow bushes somehow----"

"But now the wind has dropped," I objected "The willows can hardly make
a noise by themselves, can they?"

His answer frightened me, first because I had dreaded it, and secondly,
because I knew intuitively it was true.

"It is _because_ the wind has dropped we now hear it. It was drowned
before. It is the cry, I believe of the----"

I dashed back to my fire, warned by a sound of bubbling that the stew
was in danger, but determined at the same time to escape from further
conversation. I was resolute, if possible, to avoid the exchanging of
views. I dreaded, too, that he would begin again about the gods, or the
elemental forces, or something else disquieting, and I wanted to keep
myself well in hand for what might happen later. There was another night
to be faced before we escaped from this distressing place, and there was
no knowing yet what it might bring forth.

"Come and cut up bread for the pot," I called to him, vigorously
stirring the appetizing mixture. That stew-pot held sanity for us both,
and the thought made me laugh.

He came over slowly and took the provision sack from the tree, fumbling
in its mysterious depths, and then emptying the entire contents upon the
ground-sheet at his feet.

"Hurry up!" I cried; "it's boiling."

The Swede burst out into a roar of laughter that startled me. It was
forced laughter, not artificial exactly, but mirthless.

"There's nothing here!" he shouted, holding his sides.

"Bread, I mean."

"It's gone. There is no bread. They've taken it!"

I dropped the long spoon and ran up. Everything the sack had contained
lay upon the ground-sheet, but there was no loaf.

The whole dead weight of my growing fear fell upon me and shook me. Then
I burst out laughing too. It was the only thing to do: and the sound of
my own laughter also made me understand his. The strain of psychical
pressure caused it--this explosion of unnatural laughter in both of us;
it was an effort of repressed forces to seek relief; it was a temporary
safety valve. And with both of us it ceased quite suddenly.

"How criminally stupid of me!" I cried, still determined to be
consistent and find an explanation. "I clean forgot to buy a loaf at
Pressburg. That chattering woman put everything out of my head, and I
must have left it lying on the counter or----"

"The oatmeal, too, is much less than it was this morning," the Swede
interrupted.

Why in the world need he draw attention to it? I thought angrily.

"There's enough for to-morrow," I said, stirring vigorously, "and we can
get lots more at Komorn or Gran. In twenty-four hours we shall be miles
from here."

"I hope so--to God," he muttered, putting the things back into the sack,
"unless we're claimed first as victims for the sacrifice," he added
with a foolish laugh. He dragged the sack into the tent, for safety's
sake, I suppose, and I heard him mumbling on to himself, but so
indistinctly that it seemed quite natural for me to ignore his words.

Our meal was beyond question a gloomy one, and we ate it almost in
silence, avoiding one another's eyes, and keeping the fire bright. Then
we washed up and prepared for the night, and, once smoking, our minds
unoccupied with any definite duties, the apprehension I had felt all day
long became more and more acute. It was not then active fear, I think,
but the very vagueness of its origin distressed me far more than if I
had been able to ticket and face it squarely. The curious sound I have
likened to the note of a gong became now almost incessant, and filled
the stillness of the night with a faint, continuous ringing rather than
a series of distinct notes. At one time it was behind and at another
time in front of us. Sometimes I fancied it came from the bushes on our
left, and then again from the clumps on our right. More often it hovered
directly overhead like the whirring of wings. It was really everywhere
at once, behind, in front, at our sides and over our heads, completely
surrounding us. The sound really defies description. But nothing within
my knowledge is like that ceaseless muffled humming rising off the
deserted world of swamps and willows.

We sat smoking in comparative silence, the strain growing every minute
greater. The worst feature of the situation seemed to me that we did not
know what to expect, and could therefore make no sort of preparation by
way of defense. We could anticipate nothing. My explanations made in the
sunshine, moreover, now came to haunt me with their foolish and wholly
unsatisfactory nature, and it was more and more clear to me that some
kind of plain talk with my companion was inevitable, whether I liked it
or not. After all, we had to spend the night together, and to sleep in
the same tent side by side. I saw that I could not get along much longer
without the support of his mind, and for that, of course, plain talk was
imperative. As long as possible, however, I postponed this little
climax, and tried to ignore or laugh at the occasional sentences he
flung into the emptiness.

Some of these sentences, moreover, were confoundedly disquieting to me,
coming as they did to corroborate much that I felt myself:
corroboration, too--which made it so much more convincing--from a
totally different point of view. He composed such curious sentences, and
hurled them at me in such an inconsequential sort of way, as though his
main line of thought was secret to himself, and these fragments were the
bits he found it impossible to digest. He got rid of them by uttering
them. Speech relieved him. It was like being sick.

"There are things about us, I'm sure, that make for disorder,
disintegration, destruction, _our_ destruction," he said once, while the
fire blazed between us. "We've strayed out of a safe line somewhere."

And another time, when the gong sounds had come nearer, ringing much
louder than before, and directly over our heads, he said, as though
talking to himself:

"I don't think a phonograph would show any record of that. The sound
doesn't come to me by the ears at all. The vibrations reach me in
another manner altogether, and seem to be within me, which is precisely
how a fourth dimension sound might be supposed to make itself heard."

I purposely made no reply to this, but I sat up a little closer to the
fire and peered about me into the darkness. The clouds were massed all
over the sky and no trace of moonlight came through. Very still, too,
everything was, so that the river and the frogs had things all their own
way.

"It has that about it," he went on, "which is utterly out of common
experience. It is _unknown_. Only one thing describes it really: it is a
non-human sound; I mean a sound outside humanity."

Having rid himself of this indigestible morsel, he lay quiet for a time;
but he had so admirably expressed my own feeling that it was a relief to
have the thought out, and to have confined it by the limitation of words
from dangerous wandering to and fro in the mind.

The solitude of that Danube camping-place, can I ever forget it? The
feeling of being utterly alone on an empty planet! My thoughts ran
incessantly upon cities and the haunts of men. I would have given my
soul, as the saying is, for the "feel" of those Bavarian villages we had
passed through by the score; for the normal, human commonplaces,
peasants drinking beer, tables beneath the trees, hot sunshine, and a
ruined castle on the rocks behind the red-roofed church. Even the
tourists would have been welcome.

Yet what I felt of dread was no ordinary ghostly fear. It was infinitely
greater, stranger, and seemed to arise from some dim ancestral sense of
terror more profoundly disturbing than anything I had known or dreamed
of. We had "strayed," as the Swede put it, into some region or some set
of conditions where the risks were great, yet unintelligible to us;
where the frontiers of some unknown world lay close about us. It was a
spot held by the dwellers in some outer space, a sort of peephole whence
they could spy upon the earth, themselves unseen, a point where the veil
between had worn a little thin. As the final result of too long a
sojourn here, we should be carried over the border and deprived of what
we called "our lives," yet by mental, not physical, processes. In that
sense, as he said, we should be the victims of our adventure--a
sacrifice.

It took us in different fashion, each according to the measure of his
sensitiveness and powers of resistance. I translated it vaguely into a
personification of the mightily disturbed elements, investing them with
the horror of a deliberate and malefic purpose, resentful of our
audacious intrusion into their breeding-place; whereas my friend threw
it into the unoriginal form at first of a trespass on some ancient
shrine, some place where the old gods still held sway, where the
emotional forces of former worshipers still clung, and the ancestral
portion of him yielded to the old pagan spell.

At any rate, here was a place unpolluted by men, kept clean by the winds
from coarsening human influences, a place where spiritual agencies were
within reach and aggressive. Never, before or since, have I been so
attacked by indescribable suggestions of a "beyond region," of another
scheme of life, another evolution not parallel to the human. And in the
end our minds would succumb under the weight of the awful spell, and we
should be drawn across the frontier into _their_ world.

Small things testified to this amazing influence of the place, and now
in the silence round the fire they allowed themselves to be noted by the
mind. The very atmosphere had proved itself a magnifying medium to
distort every indication: the otter rolling in the current, the hurrying
boatman making signs, the shifting willows, one and all had been robbed
of its natural character, and revealed in something of its other
aspect--as it existed across the border in that other region. And this
changed aspect I felt was new not merely to me, but to the race. The
whole experience whose verge we touched was unknown to humanity at all.
It was a new order of experience, and in the true sense of the word
_unearthly_.

"It's the deliberate, calculating purpose that reduces one's courage to
zero," the Swede said suddenly, as if he had been actually following my
thoughts. "Otherwise imagination might count for much. But the paddle,
the canoe, the lessening food----"

"Haven't I explained all that once?" I interrupted viciously.

"You have," he answered dryly; "you have indeed."

He made other remarks too, as usual, about what he called the "plain
determination to provide a victim"; but, having now arranged my thoughts
better, I recognized that this was simply the cry of his frightened soul
against the knowledge that he was being attacked in a vital part, and
that he would be somehow taken or destroyed. The situation called for a
courage and calmness of reasoning that neither of us could compass, and
I have never before been so clearly conscious of two persons in me--the
one that explained everything, and the other that laughed at such
foolish explanations, yet was horribly afraid.

Meanwhile, in the pitchy night the fire died down and the woodpile grew
small. Neither of us moved to replenish the stock, and the darkness
consequently came up very close to our faces. A few feet beyond the
circle of firelight it was inky black. Occasionally a stray puff of wind
set the billows shivering about us, but apart from this not very welcome
sound a deep and depressing silence reigned, broken only by the gurgling
of the river and the humming in the air overhead.

We both missed, I think, the shouting company of the winds.

At length, at a moment when a stray puff prolonged itself as though the
wind were about to rise again, I reached the point for me of saturation,
the point where it was absolutely necessary to find relief in plain
speech, or else to betray myself by some hysterical extravagance that
must have been far worse in its effect upon both of us. I kicked the
fire into a blaze, and turned to my companion abruptly. He looked up
with a start.

"I can't disguise it any longer," I said; "I don't like this place, and
the darkness, and the noises, and the awful feelings I get. There's
something here that beats me utterly. I'm in a blue funk, and that's the
plain truth. If the other shore was--different, I swear I'd be inclined
to swim for it!"

The Swede's face turned very white beneath the deep tan of sun and wind.
He stared straight at me and answered quietly, but his voice betrayed
his huge excitement by its unnatural calmness. For the moment, at any
rate, he was the strong man of the two. He was more phlegmatic, for one
thing.

"It's not a physical condition we can escape from by running away," he
replied, in the tone of a doctor diagnosing some grave disease; "we must
sit tight and wait. There are forces close here that could kill a herd
of elephants in a second as easily as you or I could squash a fly. Our
only chance is to keep perfectly still. Our insignificance perhaps may
save us."

I put a dozen questions into my expression of face, but found no words.
It was precisely like listening to an accurate description of a disease
whose symptoms had puzzled me.

"I mean that so far, although aware of our disturbing presence, they
have not _found_ us--not 'located' us, as the Americans say," he went
on. "They're blundering about like men hunting for a leak of gas. The
paddle and canoe and provisions prove that. I think they _feel_ us, but
cannot actually see us. We must keep our minds quiet--it's our minds
they feel. We must control our thoughts, or it's all up with us."

"Death you mean?" I stammered, icy with the horror of his suggestion.

"Worse--by far," he said. "Death, according to one's belief, means
either annihilation or release from the limitations of the senses, but
it involves no change of character. _You_ don't suddenly alter just
because the body's gone. But this means a radical alteration, a complete
change, a horrible loss of oneself by substitution--far worse than
death, and not even annihilation. We happen to have camped in a spot
where their region touches ours where the veil between has worn
thin"--horrors! he was using my very own phrase, my actual words--"so
that they are aware of our being in their neighborhood."

"But _who_ are aware?" I asked.

I forgot the shaking of the willows in the windless calm, the humming
overhead, everything except that I was waiting for an answer that I
dreaded more than I can possibly explain.

He lowered his voice at once to reply, leaning forward a little over the
fire, an indefinable change in his face that made me avoid his eyes and
look down upon the ground.

"All my life," he said, "I have been strangely, vividly conscious of
another region--not far removed from our own world in one sense, yet
wholly different in kind--where great things go on unceasingly, where
immense and terrible personalities hurry by, intent on vast purposes
compared to which earthly affairs, the rise and fall of nations, the
destinies of empires, the fate of armies and continents, are all as dust
in the balance; vast purposes, I mean, that deal directly with the soul,
and not indirectly with mere expressions of the soul--"

"I suggest just now--" I began, seeking to stop him, feeling as though I
was face to face with a madman. But he instantly overbore me with his
torrent that _had_ to come.

"You think," he said, "it is the spirits of the elements, and I thought
perhaps it was the old gods. But I tell you now it is--_neither_. These
would be comprehensible entities, for they have relations with men,
depending upon them for worship or sacrifice, whereas these beings who
are now about us have absolutely nothing to do with mankind, and it is
mere chance that their space happens just at this spot to touch our
own."

The mere conception, which his words somehow made so convincing, as I
listened to them there in the dark stillness of that lonely island, set
me shaking a little all over. I found it impossible to control my
movements.

"And what do you propose?" I began again.

"A sacrifice, a victim, might save us by distracting them until we could
get away," he went on, "just as the wolves stop to devour the dogs and
give the sleigh another start. But--I see no chance of any other victim
now."

I stared blankly at him. The gleam in his eyes was dreadful. Presently
he continued.

"It's the willows, of course. The willows _mask_ the others, but the
others are feeling about for us. If we let our minds betray our fear,
we're lost, lost utterly." He looked at me with an expression so calm,
so determined, so sincere, that I no longer had any doubts as to his
sanity. He was as sane as any man ever was. "If we can hold out through
the night," he added, "we may get off in the daylight unnoticed, or
rather, _undiscovered_."

"But you really think a sacrifice would----"

That gong-like humming came down very close over our heads as I spoke,
but it was my friend's scared face that really stopped my mouth.

"Hush!" he whispered, holding up his hand. "Do not mention them more
than you can help. Do not refer to them _by name_. To name is to reveal:
it is the inevitable clue, and our only hope lies in ignoring them, in
order that they may ignore us."

"Even in thought?" He was extraordinarily agitated.

"Especially in thought. Our thoughts make spirals in their world. We
must keep them _out of our minds_ at all costs if possible."

I raked the fire together to prevent the darkness having everything its
own way. I never longed for the sun as I longed for it then in the awful
blackness of that summer night.

"Were you awake all last night?" he went on suddenly.

"I slept badly a little after dawn," I replied evasively, trying to
follow his instructions, which I knew instinctively were true, "but the
wind, of course--"

"I know. But the wind won't account for all the noises."

"Then you heard it too?"

"The multiplying countless little footsteps I heard," he said, adding,
after a moment's hesitation, "and that other sound--"

"You mean above the tent, and the pressing down upon us of something
tremendous, gigantic?"

He nodded significantly.

"It was like the beginning of a sort of inner suffocation?" I said.

"Partly, yes. It seemed to me that the weight of the atmosphere had been
altered--had increased enormously, so that we should be crushed."

"And _that_," I went on, determined to have it all out, pointing upwards
where the gong-like note hummed ceaselessly, rising and falling like
wind. "What do you make of that?"

"It's _their_ sound," he whispered gravely. "It's the sound of their
world, the humming in their region. The division here is so thin that it
leaks through somehow. But, if you listen carefully, you'll find it's
not above so much as around us. It's in the willows. It's the willows
themselves humming, because here the willows have been made symbols of
the forces that are against us."

I could not follow exactly what he meant by this, yet the thought and
idea in my mind were beyond question the thought and idea in his. I
realized what he realized, only with less power of analysis than his. It
was on the tip of my tongue to tell him at last about my hallucination
of the ascending figures and the moving bushes, when he suddenly thrust
his face again close into mine across the firelight and began to speak
in a very earnest whisper. He amazed me by his calmness and pluck, his
apparent control of the situation. This man I had for years deemed
unimaginative, stolid!

"Now listen," he said. "The only thing for us to do is to go on as
though nothing had happened, follow our usual habits, go to bed, and so
forth; pretend we feel nothing and notice nothing. It is a question
wholly of the mind, and the less we think about them the better our
chance of escape. Above all, don't _think_, for what you think happens!"

"All right," I managed to reply, simply breathless with his words and
the strangeness of it all; "all right, I'll try, but tell me one thing
more first. Tell me what you make of those hollows in the ground all
about us, those sand-funnels?"

"No!" he cried, forgetting to whisper in his excitement. "I dare not,
simply dare not, put the thought into words. If you have not guessed I
am glad. Don't try to. _They_ have put it into my mind; try your hardest
to prevent their putting it into yours."

He sank his voice again to a whisper before he finished, and I did not
press him to explain. There was already just about as much horror in me
as I could hold. The conversation came to an end, and we smoked our
pipes busily in silence.

Then something happened, something unimportant apparently, as the way is
when the nerves are in a very great state of tension, and this small
thing for a brief space gave me an entirely different point of view. I
chanced to look down at my sand-shoe--the sort we used for the
canoe--and something to do with the hole at the toe suddenly recalled
to me the London shop where I had bought them, the difficulty the man
had in fitting me, and other details of the uninteresting but practical
operation. At once, in its train, followed a wholesome view of the
modern skeptical world I was accustomed to move in at home. I thought of
roast beef and ale, motor-cars, policemen, brass bands, and a dozen
other things that proclaimed the soul of ordinariness or utility. The
effect was immediate and astonishing even to myself. Psychologically, I
suppose, it was simply a sudden and violent reaction after the strain of
living in an atmosphere of things that to the normal consciousness must
seem impossible and incredible. But, whatever the cause, it momentarily
lifted the spell from my heart, and left me for the short space of a
minute feeling free and utterly unafraid. I looked up at my friend
opposite.

"You damned old pagan!" I cried, laughing aloud in his face. "You
imaginative idiot! You superstitious idolator! You----"

I stopped in the middle, seized anew by the old horror. I tried to
smother the sound of my voice as something sacrilegious. The Swede, of
course, heard it too--that strange cry overhead in the darkness--and
that sudden drop in the air as though something had come nearer.

He had turned ashen white under the tan. He stood bolt upright in front
of the fire, stiff as a rod, staring at me.

"After that," he said in a sort of helpless, frantic way, "we must go!
We can't stay now; we must strike camp this very instant and go on--down
the river."

He was talking, I saw, quite wildly, his words dictated by abject
terror--the terror he had resisted so long, but which had caught him at
last.

"In the dark?" I exclaimed, shaking with fear after my hysterical
outburst, but still realizing our position better than he did. "Sheer
madness! The river's in flood, and we've only got a single paddle.
Besides, we only go deeper into their country! There's nothing ahead for
fifty miles but willows, willows, willows!"

He sat down again in a state of semi-collapse. The positions, by one of
those kaleidoscopic changes nature loves, were suddenly reversed, and
the control of our forces passed over into my hands. His mind at last
had reached the point where it was beginning to weaken.

"What on earth possessed you to do such a thing?" he whispered, with the
awe of genuine terror in his voice and face.

I crossed round to his side of the fire. I took both his hands in mine,
kneeling down beside him and looking straight into his frightened eyes.

"We'll make one more blaze," I said firmly, "and then turn in for the
night. At sunrise we'll be off full speed for Komorn. Now, pull yourself
together a bit, and remember your own advice about _not thinking
fear_!"

He said no more, and I saw that he would agree and obey. In some
measure, too, it was a sort of relief to get up and make an excursion
into the darkness for more wood. We kept close together, almost
touching, groping among the bushes and along the bank. The humming
overhead never ceased, but seemed to me to grow louder as we increased
our distance from the fire. It was shivery work!

We were grubbing away in the middle of a thickish clump of willows where
some driftwood from a former flood had caught high among the branches,
when my body was seized in a grip that made me half drop upon the sand.
It was the Swede. He had fallen against me, and was clutching me for
support. I heard his breath coming and going in short gasps.

"Look! By my soul!" he whispered, and for the first time in my
experience I knew what it was to hear tears of terror in a human voice.
He was pointing to the fire, some fifty feet away. I followed the
direction of his finger, and I swear my heart missed a beat.

There, in front of the dim glow, _something was moving_.

I saw it through a veil that hung before my eyes like the gauze
drop-curtain used at the back of a theater--hazily a little. It was
neither a human figure nor an animal. To me it gave the strange
impression of being as large as several animals grouped together, like
horses, two or three, moving slowly. The Swede, too, got a similar
result, though expressing it differently, for he thought it was shaped
and sized like a clump of willow bushes, rounded at the top, and moving
all over upon its surface--"coiling upon itself like smoke," he said
afterwards.

"I watched it settle downwards through the bushes," he sobbed at me.
"Look, by God! It's coming this way! Oh, oh!"--he gave a kind of
whistling cry. "_They've found us_."

I gave one terrified glance, which just enabled me to see that the
shadowy form was swinging towards us through the bushes, and then I
collapsed backwards with a crash into the branches. These failed, of
course, to support my weight, so that with the Swede on the top of me we
fell in a struggling heap upon the sand. I really hardly knew what was
happening. I was conscious only of a sort of enveloping sensation of icy
fear that plucked the nerves out of their fleshly covering, twisted them
this way and that, and replaced them quivering. My eyes were tightly
shut; something in my throat choked me; a feeling that my consciousness
was expanding, extending out into space, swiftly gave way to another
feeling that I was losing it altogether, and about to die.

An acute spasm of pain passed through me, and I was aware that the Swede
had hold of me in such a way that he hurt me abominably. It was the way
he caught at me in falling.

But it was this pain, he declared afterwards, that saved me: it caused
me to _forget them_ and think of something else at the very instant when
they were about to find me. It concealed my mind from them at the moment
of discovery, yet just in time to evade their terrible seizing of me. He
himself, he says, actually swooned at the same moment, and that was what
saved him.

I only know that at a later time, how long or short is impossible to
say, I found myself scrambling up out of the slippery network of willow
branches, and saw my companion standing in front of me holding out a
hand to assist me. I stared at him in a dazed way, rubbing the arm he
had twisted for me. Nothing came to me to say, somehow.

"I lost consciousness for a moment or two," I heard him say. "That's
what saved me. It made me stop thinking about them."

"You nearly broke my arm in two," I said, uttering my only connected
thought at the moment. A numbness came over me.

"That's what saved _you_!" he replied. "Between us, we've managed to set
them off on a false tack somewhere. The humming has ceased. It's
gone--for the moment at any rate!"

A wave of hysterical laughter seized me again, and this time spread to
my friend too--great healing gusts of shaking laughter that brought a
tremendous sense of relief in their train. We made our way back to the
fire and put the wood on so that it blazed at once. Then we saw that the
tent had fallen over and lay in a tangled heap upon the ground.

We picked it up, and during the process tripped more than once and
caught our feet in sand.

"It's those sand-funnels," exclaimed the Swede, when the tent was up
again and the firelight lit up the ground for several yards about us.
"And look at the size of them!"

All round the tent and about the fireplace where we had seen the moving
shadows there were deep funnel-shaped hollows in the sand, exactly
similar to the ones we had already found over the island, only far
bigger and deeper, beautifully formed, and wide enough in some instances
to admit the whole of my foot and leg.

Neither of us said a word. We both knew that sleep was the safest thing
we could do, and to bed we went accordingly without further delay,
having first thrown sand on the fire and taken the provision sack and
the paddle inside the tent with us. The canoe, too, we propped in such a
way at the end of the tent that our feet touched it, and the least
motion would disturb and wake us.

In case of emergency, too, we again went to bed in our clothes, ready
for a sudden start.


V

It was my firm intention to lie awake all night and watch, but the
exhaustion of nerves and body decreed otherwise, and sleep after a while
came over me with a welcome blanket of oblivion. The fact that my
companion also slept quickened its approach. At first he fidgeted and
constantly sat up, asking me if I "heard this" or "heard that." He
tossed about on his cork mattress, and said the tent was moving and the
river had risen over the point of the island; but each time I went out
to look I returned with the report that all was well, and finally he
grew calmer and lay still. Then at length his breathing became regular
and I heard unmistakable sounds of snoring--the first and only time in
my life when snoring has been a welcome and calming influence.

This, I remember, was the last thought in my mind before dozing off.

A difficulty in breathing woke me, and I found the blanket over my face.
But something else besides the blanket was pressing upon me, and my
first thought was that my companion had rolled off his mattress on to my
own in his sleep. I called to him and sat up, and at the same moment it
came to me that the tent was _surrounded_. That sound of multitudinous
soft pattering was again audible outside, filling the night with horror.

I called again to him, louder than before. He did not answer, but I
missed the sound of his snoring, and also noticed that the flap of the
tent door was down. This was the unpardonable sin. I crawled out in the
darkness to hook it back securely, and it was then for the first time I
realized positively that the Swede was not there. He had gone.

I dashed out in a mad run, seized by a dreadful agitation, and the
moment I was out I plunged into a sort of torrent of humming that
surrounded me completely and came out of every quarter of the heavens at
once. It was that same familiar humming--gone mad! A swarm of great
invisible bees might have been about me in the air. The sound seemed to
thicken the very atmosphere, and I felt that my lungs worked with
difficulty.

But my friend was in danger, and I could not hesitate.

The dawn was just about to break, and a faint whitish light spread
upwards over the clouds from a thin strip of clear horizon. No wind
stirred. I could just make out the bushes and river beyond, and the pale
sandy patches. In my excitement I ran frantically to and fro about the
island, calling him by name, shouting at the top of my voice the first
words that came into my head. But the willows smothered my voice, and
the humming muffled it, so that the sound only traveled a few feet round
me. I plunged among the bushes, tripping headlong, tumbling over roots,
and scraping my face as I tore this way and that among the preventing
branches.

Then, quite unexpectedly, I came out upon the island's point and saw a
dark figure outlined between the water and the sky. It was the Swede.
And already he had one foot in the river! A moment more and he would
have taken the plunge.

I threw myself upon him, flinging my arms about his waist and dragging
him shorewards with all my strength. Of course he struggled furiously,
making a noise all the time just like that cursed humming, and using the
most outlandish phrases in his anger about "going _inside_ to Them," and
"taking the way of the water and the wind," and God only knows what more
besides, that I tried in vain to recall afterwards, but which turned me
sick with horror and amazement as I listened. But in the end I managed
to get him into the comparative safety of the tent, and flung him
breathless and cursing upon the mattress, where I held him until the fit
had passed.

I think the suddenness with which it all went and he grew calm,
coinciding as it did with the equally abrupt cessation of the humming
and pattering outside--I think this was almost the strangest part of the
whole business perhaps. For he just opened his eyes and turned his tired
face up to me so that the dawn threw a pale light upon it through the
doorway, and said, for all the world just like a frightened child:

"My life, old man--it's my life I owe you. But it's all over now anyhow.
They've found a victim in our place!"

Then he dropped back upon his blankets and went to sleep literally under
my eyes. He simply collapsed, and began to snore again as healthily as
though nothing had happened and he had never tried to offer his own life
as a sacrifice by drowning. And when the sunlight woke him three hours
later--hours of ceaseless vigil for me--it became so clear to me that he
remembered absolutely nothing of what he had attempted to do, that I
deemed it wise to hold my peace and ask no dangerous questions.

He woke naturally and easily, as I have said, when the sun was already
high in a windless hot sky, and he at once got up and set about the
preparation of the fire for breakfast. I followed him anxiously at
bathing, but he did not attempt to plunge in, merely dipping his head
and making some remark about the extra coldness of the water.

"River's falling at last," he said, "and I'm glad of it."

"The humming has stopped too," I said.

He looked up at me quietly with his normal expression. Evidently he
remembered everything except his own attempt at suicide.

"Everything has stopped," he said, "because----"

He hesitated. But I knew some reference to that remark he had made just
before he fainted was in his mind, and I was determined to know it.

"Because 'They've found another victim'?" I said, forcing a little
laugh.

"Exactly," he answered, "exactly! I feel as positive of it as though--as
though--I feel quite safe again, I mean," he finished.

He began to look curiously about him. The sunlight lay in hot patches
on the sand. There was no wind. The willows were motionless. He slowly
rose to feet.

"Come," he said; "I think if we look, we shall find it."

He started off on a run, and I followed him. He kept to the banks,
poking with a stick among the sandy bays and caves and little
back-waters, myself always close on his heels.

"Ah!" he exclaimed presently, "ah!"

The tone of his voice somehow brought back to me a vivid sense of the
horror of the last twenty-four hours, and I hurried up to join him. He
was pointing with his stick at a large black object that lay half in the
water and half on the sand. It appeared to be caught by some twisted
willow roots so that the river could not sweep it away. A few hours
before the spot must have been under water.

"See," he said quietly, "the victim that made our escape possible!"

And when I peered across his shoulder I saw that his stick rested on the
body of a man. He turned it over. It was the corpse of a peasant, and
the face was hidden in the sand. Clearly the man had been drowned but a
few hours before, and his body must have been swept down upon our island
somewhere about the hour of the dawn--_at the very time the fit had
passed_.

"We must give it a decent burial, you know."

"I suppose so," I replied. I shuddered a little in spite of myself, for
there was something about the appearance of that poor drowned man that
turned me cold.

The Swede glanced up sharply at me, and began clambering down the bank.
I followed him more leisurely. The current, I noticed, had torn away
much of the clothing from the body, so that the neck and part of the
chest lay bare.

Halfway down the bank my companion suddenly stopped and held up his hand
in warning; but either my foot slipped, or I had gained too much
momentum to bring myself quickly to a halt, for I bumped into him and
sent him forward with a sort of leap to save himself. We tumbled
together on to the hard sand so that our feet splashed into the water.
And, before anything could be done, we had collided a little heavily
against the corpse.

The Swede uttered a sharp cry. And I sprang back as if I had been shot.

At the moment we touched the body there arose from its surface the loud
sound of humming--the sound of several hummings--which passed with a
vast commotion as of winged things in the air about us and disappeared
upwards into the sky, growing fainter and fainter till they finally
ceased in the distance. It was exactly as though we had disturbed some
living yet invisible creatures at work.

My companion clutched me, and I think I clutched him, but before either
of us had time properly to recover from the unexpected shock, we saw
that a movement of the current was turning the corpse round so that it
became released from the grip of the willow roots. A moment later it had
turned completely over, the dead face uppermost, staring at the sky. It
lay on the edge of the main stream. In another moment it would be swept
away.

The Swede started to save it, shouting again something I did not catch
about a "proper burial" and then abruptly dropped upon his knees on the
sand and covered his eyes with his hands. I was beside him in an
instant.

I saw what he had seen.

For just as the body swung round to the current the face and the exposed
chest turned full towards us, and showed plainly how the skin and flesh
were indented with small hollows, beautifully formed, and exactly
similar in shape and kind to the sand-funnels that we had found all over
the island.

"Their mark!" I heard my companion mutter under his breath. "Their awful
mark!"

And when I turned my eyes again from his ghastly face to the river, the
current had done its work, and the body had been swept away into
midstream and was already beyond our reach and almost out of sight,
turning over and over on the waves like an otter.



The Shadows on the Wall

BY MARY E. WILKINS FREEMAN

     From _The Wind in the Rose-bush_, by Mary E. Wilkins Freeman.
     Copyright by Harper and Brothers. By permission of the publishers
     and Mary E. Wilkins Freeman.


"Henry had words with Edward in the study the night before Edward died,"
said Caroline Glynn.

She spoke not with acrimony, but with grave severity. Rebecca Ann Glynn
gasped by way of assent. She sat in a wide flounce of black silk in the
corner of the sofa, and rolled terrified eyes from her sister Caroline
to her sister Mrs. Stephen Brigham, who had been Emma Glynn, the one
beauty of the family. The latter was beautiful still, with a large,
splendid, full-blown beauty, she filled a great rocking-chair with her
superb bulk of femininity, and swayed gently back and forth, her black
silks whispering and her black frills fluttering. Even the shock of
death--for her brother Edward lay dead in the house--could not disturb
her outward serenity of demeanor.

But even her expression of masterly placidity changed before her sister
Caroline's announcement and her sister Rebecca Ann's gasp of terror and
distress in response.

"I think Henry might have controlled his temper, when poor Edward was so
near his end," she said with an asperity which disturbed slightly the
roseate curves of her beautiful mouth.

"Of course he did not _know_," murmured Rebecca Ann in a faint tone.

"Of course he did not know it," said Caroline quickly. She turned on her
sister with a strange, sharp look of suspicion. Then she shrank as if
from the other's possible answer.

Rebecca gasped again. The married sister, Mrs. Emma Brigham, was now
sitting up straight in her chair; she had ceased rocking, and was eyeing
them both intently with a sudden accentuation of family likeness in her
face.

"What do you mean?" said she impartially to them both. Then she, too,
seemed to shrink before a possible answer. She even laughed an evasive
sort of laugh.

"Nobody means anything," said Caroline firmly. She rose and crossed the
room toward the door with grim decisiveness.

"Where are you going?" asked Mrs. Brigham.

"I have something to see to," replied Caroline, and the others at once
knew by her tone that she had some solemn and sad duty to perform in the
chamber of death.

"Oh," said Mrs. Brigham.

After the door had closed behind Caroline, she turned to Rebecca.

"Did Henry have many words with him?" she asked.

"They were talking very loud," replied Rebecca evasively.

Mrs. Brigham looked at her. She had not resumed rocking. She still sat
up straight, with a slight knitting of intensity on her fair forehead,
between the pretty rippling curves of her auburn hair.

"Did you--ever hear anything?" she asked in a low voice with a glance
toward the door.

"I was just across the hall in the south parlor, and that door was open
and this door ajar," replied Rebecca with a slight flush.

"Then you must have----"

"I couldn't help it."

"Everything?"

"Most of it."

"What was it?"

"The old story."

"I suppose Henry was mad, as he always was, because Edward was living on
here for nothing, when he had wasted all the money father left him."

Rebecca nodded, with a fearful glance at the door.

When Emma spoke again her voice was still more hushed. "I know how he
felt," said she. "It must have looked to him as if Edward was living at
his expense, but he wasn't."

"No, he wasn't."

"And Edward had a right here according to the terms of father's will,
and Henry ought to have remembered it."

"Yes, he ought."

"Did he say hard things?"

"Pretty hard, from what I heard."

"What?"

"I heard him tell Edward that he had no business here at all, and he
thought he had better go away."

"What did Edward say?"

"That he would stay here as long as he lived and afterward, too, if he
was a mind to, and he would like to see Henry get him out; and then----"

"What?"

"Then he laughed."

"What did Henry say?"

"I didn't hear him say anything, but----"

"But what?"

"I saw him when he came out of this room."

"He looked mad?"

"You've seen him when he looked so."

Emma nodded. The expression of horror on her face had deepened.

"Do you remember that time he killed the cat because she had scratched
him?"

"Yes. Don't!"

Then Caroline reentered the room; she went up to the stove, in which a
wood fire was burning--it was a cold, gloomy day of fall--and she warmed
her hands, which were reddened from recent washing in cold water.

Mrs. Brigham looked at her and hesitated. She glanced at the door, which
was still ajar; it did not easily shut, being still swollen with the
damp weather of the summer. She rose and pushed it together with a sharp
thud, which jarred the house. Rebecca started painfully with a
half-exclamation. Caroline looked at her disapprovingly.

"It is time you controlled your nerves, Rebecca," she said.

Mrs. Brigham, returning from the closed door, said imperiously that it
ought to be fixed, it shut so hard.

"It will shrink enough after we have had the fire a few days," replied
Caroline.

"I think Henry ought to be ashamed of himself for talking as he did to
Edward," said Mrs. Brigham abruptly, but in an almost inaudible voice.

"Hush," said Caroline, with a glance of actual fear at the closed door.

"Nobody can hear with the door shut. I say again I think Henry ought to
be ashamed of himself. I shouldn't think he'd ever get over it, having
words with poor Edward the very night before he died. Edward was enough
sight better disposition than Henry, with all his faults."

"I never heard him speak a cross word, unless he spoke cross to Henry
that last night. I don't know but he did from what Rebecca overheard."

"Not so much cross, as sort of soft, and sweet, and aggravating,"
sniffed Rebecca.

"What do you really think ailed Edward?" asked Emma in hardly more than
a whisper. She did not look at her sister.

"I know you said that he had terrible pains in his stomach, and had
spasms, but what do you think made him have them?"

"Henry called it gastric trouble. You know Edward has always had
dyspepsia."

Mrs. Brigham hesitated a moment. "Was there any talk of
an--examination?" said she.

Then Caroline turned on her fiercely.

"No," said she in a terrible voice. "No."

The three sisters' souls seemed to meet on one common ground of
terrified understanding through their eyes.

The old-fashioned latch of the door was heard to rattle, and a push from
without made the door shake ineffectually. "It's Henry," Rebecca sighed
rather than whispered. Mrs. Brigham settled herself, after a noiseless
rush across the floor, into her rocking-chair again, and was swaying
back and forth with her head comfortably leaning back, when the door at
last yielded and Henry Glynn entered. He cast a covertly sharp,
comprehensive glance at Mrs. Brigham with her elaborate calm; at Rebecca
quietly huddled in the corner of the sofa with her handkerchief to her
face and only one small uncovered reddened ear as attentive as a dog's,
and at Caroline sitting with a strained composure in her armchair by the
stove. She met his eyes quite firmly with a look of inscrutable fear,
and defiance of the fear and of him.

Henry Glynn looked more like this sister than the others. Both had the
same hard delicacy of form and aquilinity of feature. They confronted
each other with the pitiless immovability of two statues in whose
marble lineaments emotions were fixed for all eternity.

Then Henry Glynn smiled and the smile transformed his face. He looked
suddenly years younger, and an almost boyish recklessness appeared in
his face. He flung himself into a chair with a gesture which was
bewildering from its incongruity with his general appearance. He leaned
his head back, flung one leg over the other, and looked laughingly at
Mrs. Brigham.

"I declare, Emma, you grow younger every year," he said.

She flushed a little, and her placid mouth widened at the corners. She
was susceptible to praise.

"Our thoughts to-day ought to belong to the one of us who will _never_
grow older," said Caroline in a hard voice.

Henry looked at her, still smiling. "Of course, we none of us forget
that," said he, in a deep, gentle voice; "but we have to speak to the
living, Caroline, and I have not seen Emma for a long time, and the
living are as dear as the dead."

"Not to me," said Caroline.

She rose and went abruptly out of the room again. Rebecca also rose and
hurried after her, sobbing loudly.

Henry looked slowly after them.

"Caroline is completely unstrung," said he.

Mrs. Brigham rocked. A confidence in him inspired by his manner was
stealing over her. Out of that confidence she spoke quite easily and
naturally.

"His death was very sudden," said she.

Henry's eyelids quivered slightly but his gaze was unswerving.

"Yes," said he, "it was very sudden. He was sick only a few hours."

"What did you call it?"

"Gastric."

"You did not think of an examination?"

"There was no need. I am perfectly certain as to the cause of his
death."

Suddenly Mrs. Brigham felt a creep as of some live horror over her very
soul. Her flesh prickled with cold, before an inflection of his voice.
She rose, tottering on weak knees.

"Where are you going?" asked Henry in a strange, breathless voice.

Mrs. Brigham said something incoherent about some sewing which she had
to do--some black for the funeral--and was out of the room. She went up
to the front chamber which she occupied. Caroline was there. She went
close to her and took her hands, and the two sisters looked at each
other.

"Don't speak, don't, I won't have it!" said Caroline finally in an awful
whisper.

"I won't," replied Emma.

That afternoon the three sisters were in the study.

Mrs. Brigham was hemming some black material. At last she laid her work
on her lap.

"It's no use, I cannot see to sew another stitch until we have a light,"
said she.

Caroline, who was writing some letters at the table, turned to Rebecca,
in her usual place on the sofa.

"Rebecca, you had better get a lamp," she said.

Rebecca started up; even in the dusk her face showed her agitation.

"It doesn't seem to me that we need a lamp quite yet," she said in a
piteous, pleading voice like a child's.

"Yes, we do," returned Mrs. Brigham peremptorily. "I can't see to sew
another stitch."

Rebecca rose and left the room. Presently she entered with a lamp. She
set it on the table, an old-fashioned card-table which was placed
against the opposite wall from the window. That opposite wall was taken
up with three doors; the one small space was occupied by the table.

"What have you put that lamp over there for?" asked Mrs. Brigham, with
more of impatience than her voice usually revealed. "Why didn't you set
it in the hall, and have done with it? Neither Caroline nor I can see if
it is on that table."

"I thought perhaps you would move," replied Rebecca hoarsely.

"If I do move, we can't both sit at that table. Caroline has her paper
all spread around. Why don't you set the lamp on the study table in the
middle of the room, then we can both see?"

Rebecca hesitated. Her face was very pale. She looked with an appeal
that was fairly agonizing at her sister Caroline.

"Why don't you put the lamp on this table, as she says?" asked Caroline,
almost fiercely. "Why do you act so, Rebecca?"

Rebecca took the lamp and set it on the table in the middle of the room
without another word. Then she seated herself on the sofa and placed a
hand over her eyes as if to shade them, and remained so.

"Does the light hurt your eyes, and is that the reason why you didn't
want the lamp?" asked Mrs. Brigham kindly.

"I always like to sit in the dark," replied Rebecca chokingly. Then she
snatched her handkerchief hastily from her pocket and began to weep.
Caroline continued to write, Mrs. Brigham to sew.

Suddenly Mrs. Brigham as she sewed glanced at the opposite wall. The
glance became a steady stare. She looked intently, her work suspended in
her hands. Then she looked away again and took a few more stitches, then
she looked again, and again turned to her task. At last she laid her
work in her lap and stared concentratedly. She looked from the wall
round the room, taking note of the various objects. Then she turned to
her sisters.

"What _is_ that?" said she.

"What?" asked Caroline harshly.

"That strange shadow on the wall," replied Mrs. Brigham.

Rebecca sat with her face hidden; Caroline dipped her pen in the
inkstand.

"Why don't you turn around and look?" asked Mrs. Brigham in a wondering
and somewhat aggrieved way.

"I am in a hurry to finish this letter," replied Caroline shortly.

Mrs. Brigham rose, her work slipping to the floor, and began walking
round the room, moving various articles of furniture, with her eyes on
the shadow.

Then suddenly she shrieked out:

"Look at this awful shadow! What is it? Caroline, look, look! Rebecca,
look! What is it?"

All Mrs. Brigham's triumphant placidity was gone. Her handsome face was
livid with horror. She stood stiffly pointing at the shadow.

Then after a shuddering glance at the wall Rebecca burst out in a wild
wail.

"Oh, Caroline, there it is again, there it is again!"

"Caroline Glynn, you look!" said Mrs. Brigham. "Look! What is that
dreadful shadow?"

Caroline rose, turned, and stood confronting the wall.

"How should I know?" she said.

"It has been there every night since he died!" cried Rebecca.

"Every night?"

"Yes; he died Thursday and this is Saturday; that makes three nights,"
said Caroline rigidly. She stood as if holding her calm with a vise of
concentrated will.

"It--it looks like--like--" stammered Mrs. Brigham in a tone of intense
horror.

"I know what it looks like well enough," said Caroline. "I've got eyes
in my head."

"It looks like Edward," burst out Rebecca in a sort of frenzy of fear.
"Only----"

"Yes, it does," assented Mrs. Brigham, whose horror-stricken tone
matched her sisters', "only--Oh, it is awful! What is it, Caroline?"

"I ask you again, how should I know?" replied Caroline. "I see it there
like you. How should I know any more than you?"

"It _must_ be something in the room," said Mrs. Brigham, staring wildly
around.

"We moved everything in the room the first night it came," said Rebecca;
"it is not anything in the room."

Caroline turned upon her with a sort of fury. "Of course it is something
in the room," said she. "How you act! What do you mean talking so? Of
course it is something in the room."

"Of course it is," agreed Mrs. Brigham, looking at Caroline
suspiciously. "It must be something in the room."

"It is not anything in the room," repeated Rebecca with obstinate
horror.

The door opened suddenly and Henry Glynn entered. He began to speak,
then his eyes followed the direction of the others. He stood staring at
the shadow on the wall.

"What is that?" he demanded in a strange voice.

"It must be due to something in the room," Mrs. Brigham said faintly.

Henry Glynn stood and stared a moment longer. His face showed a gamut of
emotions. Horror, conviction, then furious incredulity. Suddenly he
began hastening hither and thither about the room. He moved the
furniture with fierce jerks, turning ever to see the effect upon the
shadow on the wall. Not a line of its terrible outlines wavered.

"It must be something in the room!" he declared in a voice which seemed
to snap like a lash.

His face changed, the inmost secrecy of his nature seemed evident upon
his face, until one almost lost sight of his lineaments. Rebecca stood
close to her sofa, regarding him with woeful, fascinated eyes. Mrs.
Brigham clutched Caroline's hand. They both stood in a corner out of his
way. For a few moments he raged about the room like a caged wild animal.
He moved every piece of furniture; when the moving of a piece did not
affect the shadow he flung it to the floor.

Then suddenly he desisted. He laughed.

"What an absurdity," he said easily. "Such a to-do about a shadow."

"That's so," assented Mrs. Brigham, in a scared voice which she tried to
make natural. As she spoke she lifted a chair near her.

"I think you have broken the chair that Edward was fond of," said
Caroline.

Terror and wrath were struggling for expression on her face. Her mouth
was set, her eyes shrinking. Henry lifted the chair with a show of
anxiety.

"Just as good as ever," he said pleasantly. He laughed again, looking at
his sisters. "Did I scare you?" he said. "I should think you might be
used to me by this time. You know my way of wanting to leap to the
bottom of a mystery, and that shadow does look--queer, like--and I
thought if there was any way of accounting for it I would like to
without any delay."

"You don't seem to have succeeded," remarked Caroline dryly, with a
slight glance at the wall.

Henry's eyes followed hers and he quivered perceptibly.

"Oh, there is no accounting for shadows," he said, and he laughed again.
"A man is a fool to try to account for shadows."

Then the supper bell rang, and they all left the room, but Henry kept
his back to the wall--as did, indeed, the others.

Henry led the way with an alert motion like a boy; Rebecca brought up
the rear. She could scarcely walk, her knees trembled so.

"I can't sit in that room again this evening," she whispered to Caroline
after supper.

"Very well; we will sit in the south room," replied Caroline. "I think
we will sit in the south parlor," she said aloud; "it isn't as damp as
the study, and I have a cold."

So they all sat in the south room with their sewing. Henry read the
newspaper, his chair drawn close to the lamp on the table. About nine
o'clock he rose abruptly and crossed the hall to the study. The three
sisters looked at one another. Mrs. Brigham rose, folded her rustling
skirts compactly round her, and began tiptoeing toward the door.

"What are you going to do?" inquired Rebecca agitatedly.

"I am going to see what he is about," replied Mrs. Brigham cautiously.

As she spoke she pointed to the study door across the hall; it was ajar.
Henry had striven to pull it together behind him, but it had somehow
swollen beyond the limit with curious speed. It was still ajar and a
streak of light showed from top to bottom.

Mrs. Brigham folded her skirts so tightly that her bulk with its
swelling curves was revealed in a black silk sheath, and she went with a
slow toddle across the hall to the study door. She stood there, her eye
at the crack.

In the south room Rebecca stopped sewing and sat watching with dilated
eyes. Caroline sewed steadily. What Mrs. Brigham, standing at the crack
in the study door, saw was this:

Henry Glynn, evidently reasoning that the source of the strange shadow
must be between the table on which the lamp stood and the wall, was
making systematic passes and thrusts with an old sword which had
belonged to his father all over and through the intervening space. Not
an inch was left unpierced. He seemed to have divided the space into
mathematical sections. He brandished the sword with a sort of cold fury
and calculation; the blade gave out flashes of light, the shadow
remained unmoved. Mrs. Brigham, watching, felt herself cold with horror.

Finally Henry ceased and stood with the sword in hand and raised as if
to strike, surveying the shadow on the wall threateningly. Mrs. Brigham
toddled back across the hall and shut the south room door behind her
before she related what she had seen.

"He looked like a demon," she said again. "Have you got any of that old
wine in the house, Caroline? I don't feel as if I could stand much
more."

"Yes, there's plenty," said Caroline; "you can have some when you go to
bed."

"I think we had all better take some," said Mrs. Brigham. "Oh, Caroline,
what----"

"Don't ask; don't speak," said Caroline.

"No, I'm not going to," replied Mrs. Brigham; "but----"

Soon the three sisters went to their chambers and the south parlor was
deserted. Caroline called to Henry in the study to put out the light
before he came upstairs. They had been gone about an hour when he came
into the room bringing the lamp which had stood in the study. He set it
on the table, and waited a few minutes, pacing up and down. His face was
terrible, his fair complexion showed livid, and his blue eyes seemed
dark blanks of awful reflections.

Then he took up the lamp and returned to the library. He set the lamp on
the center table and the shadow sprang out on the wall. Again he studied
the furniture and moved it about, but deliberately, with none of his
former frenzy. Nothing affected the shadow. Then he returned to the
south room with the lamp and again waited. Again he returned to the
study and placed the lamp on the table, and the shadow sprang out upon
the wall. It was midnight before he went upstairs. Mrs. Brigham and the
other sisters, who could not sleep, heard him.

The next day was the funeral. That evening the family sat in the south
room. Some relatives were with them. Nobody entered the study until
Henry carried a lamp in there after the others had retired for the
night. He saw again the shadow on the wall leap to an awful life before
the light.

The next morning at breakfast Henry Glynn announced that he had to go to
the city for three days. The sisters looked at him with surprise. He
very seldom left home, and just now his practice had been neglected on
account of Edward's death.

"How can you leave your patients now?" asked Mrs. Brigham wonderingly.

"I don't know how to, but there is no other way," replied Henry easily.
"I have had a telegram from Dr. Mitford."

"Consultation?" inquired Mrs. Brigham.

"I have business," replied Henry.

Doctor Mitford was an old classmate of his who lived in a neighboring
city and who occasionally called upon him in the case of a consultation.

After he had gone, Mrs. Brigham said to Caroline that, after all, Henry
had not said that he was going to consult with Doctor Mitford, and she
thought it very strange.

"Everything is very strange," said Rebecca with a shudder.

"What do you mean?" inquired Caroline.

"Nothing," replied Rebecca.

Nobody entered the study that day, nor the next. The third day Henry was
expected home, but he did not arrive and the last train from the city
had come.

"I call it pretty queer work," said Mrs. Brigham. "The idea of a doctor
leaving his patients at such a time as this, and the idea of a
consultation lasting three days! There is no sense in it, and _now_ he
has not come. I don't understand it, for my part."

"I don't either," said Rebecca.

They were all in the south parlor. There was no light in the study; the
door was ajar.

Presently Mrs. Brigham rose--she could not have told why; something
seemed to impel her--some will outside her own. She went out of the
room, again wrapping her rustling skirts round that she might pass
noiselessly, and began pushing at the swollen door of the study.

"She has not got any lamp," said Rebecca in a shaking voice.

Caroline, who was writing letters, rose again, took the only remaining
lamp in the room, and followed her sister. Rebecca had risen, but she
stood trembling, not venturing to follow.

The doorbell rang, but the others did not hear it; it was on the south
door on the other side of the house from the study. Rebecca, after
hesitating until the bell rang the second time, went to the door; she
remembered that the servant was out.

Caroline and her sister Emma entered the study. Caroline set the lamp on
the table. They looked at the wall, and there were two shadows. The
sisters stood clutching each other, staring at the awful things on the
wall. Then Rebecca came in, staggering, with a telegram in her hand.
"Here is--a telegram," she gasped. "Henry is--dead."



The Messenger

BY ROBERT W. CHAMBERS

    Little gray messenger,
    Robed like painted Death,
    Your robe is dust.
    Whom do you seek
    Among lilies and closed buds
      At dusk?

    Among lilies and closed buds
      At dusk,
    Whom do you seek,
    Little gray messenger,
    Robed in the awful panoply
    Of painted Death?
                                                                  R.W.C.

     From _The Mystery of Choice_, by Robert W. Chambers. Published,
     1897, by D. Appleton and Company. Copyright by Robert W. Chambers.
     By permission of Robert W. Chambers.




        All-wise,
    Hast thou seen all there is to see with thy two eyes?
      Dost thou know all there is to know, and so,
        Omniscient,
    Darest thou still to say thy brother lies?
                                                                  R.W.C.


I

"The bullet entered here," said Max Fortin, and he placed his middle
finger over a smooth hole exactly in the center of the forehead.

I sat down upon a mound of dry seaweed and unslung my fowling piece.

The little chemist cautiously felt the edges of the shot-hole, first
with his middle finger, and then with his thumb.

"Let me see the skull again," said I.

Max Fortin picked it up from the sod.

"It's like all the others," he repeated, wiping his glasses on his
handkerchief. "I thought you might care to see one of the skulls, so I
brought this over from the gravel pit. The men from Bannalec are digging
yet. They ought to stop."

"How many skulls are there altogether?" I inquired.

"They found thirty-eight skulls; there are thirty-nine noted in the
list. They lie piled up in the gravel pit on the edge of Le Bihan's
wheat field. The men are at work yet. Le Bihan is going to stop them."

"Let's go over," said I; and I picked up my gun and started across the
cliffs, Portin on one side, Mome on the other.

"Who has the list?" I asked, lighting my pipe. "You say there is a
list?"

"The list was found rolled up in a brass cylinder," said the chemist. He
added: "You should not smoke here. You know that if a single spark
drifted into the wheat--"

"Ah, but I have a cover to my pipe," said I, smiling.

Fortin watched me as I closed the pepper-box arrangement over the
glowing bowl of the pipe. Then he continued:

"The list was made out on thick yellow paper; the brass tube has
preserved it. It is as fresh to-day as it was in 1760. You shall see
it."

"Is that the date?"

"The list is dated 'April, 1760.' The Brigadier Durand has it. It is not
written in French."

"Not written in French!" I exclaimed.

"No," replied Fortin solemnly, "it is written in Breton."

"But," I protested, "the Breton language was never written or printed in
1760."

"Except by priests," said the chemist.

"I have heard of but one priest who ever wrote the Breton language," I
began.

Fortin stole a glance at my face.

"You mean--the Black Priest?" he asked.

I nodded.

Fortin opened his mouth to speak again, hesitated, and finally shut his
teeth obstinately over the wheat stem that he was chewing.

"And the Black Priest?" I suggested encouragingly. But I knew it was
useless; for it is easier to move the stars from their courses than to
make an obstinate Breton talk. We walked on for a minute or two in
silence.

"Where is the Brigadier Durand?" I asked, motioning Mome to come out of
the wheat, which he was trampling as though it were heather. As I spoke
we came in sight of the farther edge of the wheat field and the dark,
wet mass of cliffs beyond.

"Durand is down there--you can see him; he stands just behind the mayor
of St. Gildas."

"I see," said I; and we struck straight down, following a sun-baked
cattle path across the heather.

When we reached the edge of the wheat field, Le Bihan, the mayor of St.
Gildas, called to me, and I tucked my gun under my arm and skirted the
wheat to where he stood.

"Thirty-eight skulls," he said in his thin, high-pitched voice; "there
is but one more, and I am opposed to further search. I suppose Fortin
told you?"

I shook hands with him, and returned the salute of the Brigadier Durand.

"I am opposed to further search," repeated Le Bihan, nervously picking
at the mass of silver buttons which covered the front of his velvet and
broadcloth jacket like a breastplate of scale armor.

Durand pursed up his lips, twisted his tremendous mustache, and hooked
his thumbs in his saber belt.

"As for me," he said, "I am in favor of further search."

"Further search for what--for the thirty-ninth skull?" I asked.

Le Bihan nodded. Durand frowned at the sunlit sea, rocking like a bowl
of molten gold from the cliffs to the horizon. I followed his eyes. On
the dark glistening cliffs, silhouetted against the glare of the sea,
sat a cormorant, black, motionless, its horrible head raised toward
heaven.

"Where is that list, Durand?" I asked.

The gendarme rummaged in his despatch pouch and produced a brass
cylinder about a foot long. Very gravely he unscrewed the head and
dumped out a scroll of thick yellow paper closely covered with writing
on both sides. At a nod from Le Bihan he handed me the scroll. But I
could make nothing of the coarse writing, now faded to a dull brown.

"Come, come, Le Bihan," I said impatiently, "translate it, won't you?
You and Max Fortin make a lot of mystery out of nothing, it seems."

Le Bihan went to the edge of the pit where the three Bannalec men were
digging, gave an order or two in Breton, and turned to me.

As I came to the edge of the pit the Bannalec men were removing a square
piece of sailcloth from what appeared to be a pile of cobblestones.

"Look!" said Le Bihan shrilly. I looked. The pile below was a heap of
skulls. After a moment I clambered down the gravel sides of the pit and
walked over to the men of Bannalec. They saluted me gravely, leaning on
their picks and shovels, and wiping their sweating faces with sunburned
hands.

"How many?" said I in Breton.

"Thirty-eight," they replied.

I glanced around. Beyond the heap of skulls lay two piles of human
bones. Beside these was a mound of broken, rusted bits of iron and
steel. Looking closer, I saw that this mound was composed of rusty
bayonets, saber blades, scythe blades, with here and there a tarnished
buckle attached to a bit of leather hard as iron.

I picked up a couple of buttons and a belt plate. The buttons bore the
royal arms of England; the belt plate was emblazoned with the English
arms and also with the number "27."

"I have heard my grandfather speak of the terrible English regiment, the
27th Foot, which landed and stormed the fort up there," said one of the
Bannalec men.

"Oh!" said I; "then these are the bones of English soldiers?"

"Yes," said the men of Bannalec.

Le Bihan was calling to me from the edge of the pit above, and I handed
the belt plate and buttons to the men and climbed the side of the
excavation.

"Well," said I, trying to prevent Mome from leaping up and licking my
face as I emerged from the pit, "I suppose you know what these bones
are. What are you going to do with them?"

"There was a man," said Le Bihan angrily, "an Englishman, who passed
here in a dog-cart on his way to Quimper about an hour ago, and what do
you suppose he wished to do?"

"Buy the relics?" I asked, smiling.

"Exactly--the pig!" piped the mayor of St. Gildas. "Jean Marie Tregunc,
who found the bones, was standing there where Max Fortin stands, and do
you know what he answered? He spat upon the ground, and said: 'Pig of an
Englishman, do you take me for a desecrator of graves?'"

I knew Tregunc, a sober, blue-eyed Breton, who lived from one year's end
to the other without being able to afford a single bit of meat for a
meal.

"How much did the Englishman offer Tregunc?" I asked.

"Two hundred francs for the skulls alone."

I thought of the relic hunters and the relic buyers on the battlefields
of our civil war.

"Seventeen hundred and sixty is long ago," I said.

"Respect for the dead can never die," said Fortin.

"And the English soldiers came here to kill your fathers and burn your
homes," I continued.

"They were murderers and thieves, but--they are dead," said Tregunc,
coming up from the beach below, his long sea rake balanced on his
dripping jersey.

"How much do you earn every year, Jean Marie?" I asked, turning to shake
hands with him.

"Two hundred and twenty francs, monsieur."

"Forty-five dollars a year," I said. "Bah! you are worth more, Jean.
Will you take care of my garden for me? My wife wished me to ask you. I
think it would be worth one hundred francs a month to you and to me.
Come on, Le Bihan--come along, Fortin--and you, Durand. I want somebody
to translate that list into French for me."

Tregunc stood gazing at me, his blue eyes dilated.

"You may begin at once," I said, smiling, "if the salary suits you?"

"It suits," said Tregunc, fumbling for his pipe in a silly way that
annoyed Le Bihan.

"Then go and begin your work," cried the mayor impatiently; and Tregunc
started across the moors toward St. Gildas, taking off his
velvet-ribboned cap to me and gripping his sea rake very hard.

"You offer him more than my salary," said the mayor, after a moment's
contemplation of his silver buttons.

"Pooh!" said I, "what do you do for your salary except play dominoes
with Max Portin at the Groix Inn?"

Le Bihan turned red, but Durand rattled his saber and winked at Max
Fortin, and I slipped my arm through the arm of the sulky magistrate,
laughing.

"There's a shady spot under the cliff," I said; "come on, Le Bihan, and
read me what is in the scroll."

In a few moments we reached the shadow of the cliff, and I threw myself
upon the turf, chin on hand, to listen.

The gendarme, Durand, also sat down, twisting his mustache into
needlelike points. Fortin leaned against the cliff, polishing his
glasses and examining us with vague, near-sighted eyes; and Le Bihan,
the mayor, planted himself in our midst, rolling up the scroll and
tucking it under his arm.

"First of all," he began in a shrill voice, "I am going to light my
pipe, and while lighting it I shall tell you what I have heard about the
attack on the fort yonder. My father told me; his father told him."

He jerked his head in the direction of the ruined fort, a small, square
stone structure on the sea cliff, now nothing but crumbling walls. Then
he slowly produced a tobacco pouch, a bit of flint and tinder, and a
long-stemmed pipe fitted with a microscopical bowl of baked clay. To
fill such a pipe requires ten minutes' close attention. To smoke it to a
finish takes but four puffs. It is very Breton, this Breton pipe. It is
the crystallization of everything Breton.

"Go on," said I, lighting a cigarette.

"The fort," said the mayor, "was built by Louis XIV, and was dismantled
twice by the English. Louis XV restored it in 1730. In 1760 it was
carried by assault by the English. They came across from the island of
Groix--three shiploads, and they stormed the fort and sacked St. Julien
yonder, and they started to burn St. Gildas--you can see the marks of
their bullets on my house yet; but the men of Bannalec and the men of
Lorient fell upon them with pike and scythe and blunderbuss, and those
who did not run away lie there below in the gravel pit now--thirty-eight
of them."

"And the thirty-ninth skull?" I asked, finishing my cigarette.

The mayor had succeeded in filling his pipe, and now he began to put his
tobacco pouch away.

"The thirty-ninth skull," he mumbled, holding the pipe stem between his
defective teeth--"the thirty-ninth skull is no business of mine. I have
told the Bannalec men to cease digging."

"But what is--whose is the missing skull?" I persisted curiously.

The mayor was busy trying to strike a spark to his tinder. Presently he
set it aglow, applied it to his pipe, took the prescribed four puffs,
knocked the ashes out of the bowl, and gravely replaced the pipe in his
pocket.

"The missing skull?" he asked.


"Yes," said I, impatiently.

The mayor slowly unrolled the scroll and began to read, translating from
the Breton into French. And this is what he read:


                                        "ON THE CLIFFS OF ST. GILDAS,
                                           APRIL 13, 1760.

"On this day, by order of the Count of Soisic, general in chief of the
Breton forces now lying in Kerselec Forest, the bodies of thirty-eight
English soldiers of the 27th, 50th, and 72d regiments of Foot were
buried in this spot, together with their arms and equipments."

The mayor paused and glanced at me reflectively.

"Go on, Le Bihan," I said.

"With them," continued the mayor, turning the scroll and reading on the
other side, "was buried the body of that vile traitor who betrayed the
fort to the English. The manner of his death was as follows: By order of
the most noble Count of Soisic, the traitor was first branded upon the
forehead with the brand of an arrowhead. The iron burned through the
flesh and was pressed heavily so that the brand should even burn into
the bone of the skull. The traitor was then led out and bidden to
kneel. He admitted having guided the English from the island of Groix.
Although a priest and a Frenchman, he had violated his priestly office
to aid him in discovering the password to the fort. This password he
extorted during confession from a young Breton girl who was in the habit
of rowing across from the island of Groix to visit her husband in the
fort. When the fort fell, this young girl, crazed by the death of her
husband, sought the Count of Soisic and told how the priest had forced
her to confess to him all she knew about the fort. The priest was
arrested at St. Gildas as he was about to cross the river to Lorient.
When arrested he cursed the girl, Marie Trevec----"

"What!" I exclaimed, "Marie Trevec!"

"Marie Trevec," repeated Le Bihan; "the priest cursed Marie Trevec, and
all her family and descendants. He was shot as he knelt, having a mask
of leather over his face, because the Bretons who composed the squad of
execution refused to fire at a priest unless his face was concealed. The
priest was l'Abbe Sorgue, commonly known as the Black Priest on account
of his dark face and swarthy eyebrows. He was buried with a stake
through his heart."

Le Bihan paused, hesitated, looked at me, and handed the manuscript back
to Durand. The gendarme took it and slipped it into the brass cylinder.

"So," said I, "the thirty-ninth skull is the skull of the Black
Priest."

"Yes," said Fortin. "I hope they won't find it."

"I have forbidden them to proceed," said the mayor querulously. "You
heard me, Max Fortin."

I rose and picked up my gun. Mome came and pushed his head into my hand.

"That's a fine dog," observed Durand, also rising.

"Why don't you wish to find his skull?" I asked Le Bihan. "It would be
curious to see whether the arrow brand really burned into the bone."

"There is something in that scroll that I didn't read to you," said the
mayor grimly. "Do you wish to know what it is?"

"Of course," I replied in surprise.

"Give me the scroll again, Durand," he said; then he read from the
bottom: "I, l'Abbe Sorgue, forced to write the above by my executioners,
have written it in my own blood; and with it I leave my curse. My curse
on St. Gildas, on Marie Trevec, and on her descendants. I will come back
to St. Gildas when my remains are disturbed. Woe to that Englishman whom
my branded skull shall touch!"

"What rot!" I said. "Do you believe it was really written in his own
blood?"

"I am going to test it," said Fortin, "at the request of Monsieur le
Maire. I am not anxious for the job, however."

"See," said Le Bihan, holding out the scroll to me, "it is signed,
'L'Abbe Sorgue.'"

I glanced curiously over the paper.

"It must be the Black Priest," I said. "He was the only man who wrote in
the Breton language. This is a wonderfully interesting discovery, for
now, at last, the mystery of the Black Priest's disappearance is cleared
up. You will, of course, send this scroll to Paris, Le Bihan?"

"No," said the mayor obstinately, "it shall be buried in the pit below
where the rest of the Black Priest lies."

I looked at him and recognized that argument would be useless. But still
I said, "It will be a loss to history, Monsieur Le Bihan."

"All the worse for history, then," said the enlightened Mayor of St.
Gildas.

We had sauntered back to the gravel pit while speaking. The men of
Bannalec were carrying the bones of the English soldiers toward the St.
Gildas cemetery, on the cliffs to the east, where already a knot of
white-coiffed women stood in attitudes of prayer; and I saw the somber
robe of a priest among the crosses of the little graveyard.

"They were thieves and assassins; they are dead now," muttered Max
Fortin.

"Respect the dead," repeated the Mayor of St. Gildas, looking after the
Bannalec men.

"It was written in that scroll that Marie Trevec, of Groix Island, was
cursed by the priest--she and her descendants," I said, touching Le
Bihan on the arm. "There was a Marie Trevec who married an Yves Trevec
of St. Gildas----"

"It is the same," said Le Bihan, looking at me obliquely.

"Oh!" said I; "then they were ancestors of my wife."

"Do you fear the curse?" asked Le Bihan.

"What?" I laughed.

"There was the case of the Purple Emperor," said Max Fortin timidly.

Startled for a moment, I faced him, then shrugged my shoulders and
kicked at a smooth bit of rock which lay near the edge of the pit,
almost embedded in gravel.

"Do you suppose the Purple-Emperor drank himself crazy because he was
descended from Marie Trevec?" I asked contemptuously.

"Of course not," said Max Fortin hastily.

"Of course not," piped the mayor. "I only--Hellow! what's that you're
kicking?"

"What?" said I, glancing down, at the same time involuntarily giving
another kick. The smooth bit of rock dislodged itself and rolled out of
the loosened gravel at my feet.

"The thirty-ninth skull!" I exclaimed. "By jingo, it's the noddle of the
Black Priest! See! there is the arrowhead branded on the front!"

The mayor stepped back. Max Fortin also retreated. There was a pause,
during which I looked at them, and they looked anywhere but at me.

"I don't like it," said the mayor at last, in a husky, high voice. "I
don't like it! The scroll says he will come back to St. Gildas when his
remains are disturbed. I--I don't like it, Monsieur Darrel--"

"Bosh!" said I; "the poor wicked devil is where he can't get out. For
Heaven's sake, Le Bihan, what is this stuff you are talking in the year
of grace 1896?"

The mayor gave me a look.

"And he says 'Englishman.' You are an Englishman, Monsieur Darrel," he
announced.

"You know better. You know I'm an American."

"It's all the same," said the Mayor of St. Gildas, obstinately.

"No, it isn't!" I answered, much exasperated, and deliberately pushed
the skull till it rolled into the bottom of the gravel pit below.

"Cover it up," said I; "bury the scroll with it too, if you insist, but
I think you ought to send it to Paris. Don't look so gloomy, Fortin,
unless you believe in werewolves and ghosts. Hey! what the--what the
devil's the matter with you, anyway? What are you staring at, Le Bihan?"

"Come, come," muttered the mayor in a low, tremulous voice, "it's time
we got out of this. Did you see? Did you see, Fortin?"

"I saw," whispered Max Fortin, pallid with fright.

The two men were almost running across the sunny pasture now, and I
hastened after them, demanding to know what was the matter.

"Matter!" chattered the mayor, gasping with exasperation and terror.
"The skull is rolling up hill again," and he burst into a terrified
gallop, Max Fortin followed close behind.

I watched them stampeding across the pasture, then turned toward the
gravel pit, mystified, incredulous. The skull was lying on the edge of
the pit, exactly where it had been before I pushed it over the edge. For
a second I stared at it; a singular chilly feeling crept up my spinal
column, and I turned and walked away, sweat starting from the root of
every hair on my head. Before I had gone twenty paces the absurdity of
the whole thing struck me. I halted, hot with shame and annoyance, and
retraced my steps.

There lay the skull.

"I rolled a stone down instead of the skull," I muttered to myself. Then
with the butt of my gun I pushed the skull over the edge of the pit and
watched it roll to the bottom; and as it struck the bottom of the pit,
Mome, my dog, suddenly whipped his tail between his legs, whimpered, and
made off across the moor.

"Mome!" I shouted, angry and astonished; but the dog only fled the
faster, and I ceased calling from sheer surprise.

"What the mischief is the matter with that dog!" I thought. He had never
before played me such a trick.

Mechanically I glanced into the pit, but I could not see the skull. I
looked down. The skull lay at my feet again, touching them.

"Good heavens!" I stammered, and struck at it blindly with my gunstock.
The ghastly thing flew into the air, whirling over and over, and rolled
again down the sides of the pit to the bottom. Breathlessly I stared at
it, then, confused and scarcely comprehending, I stepped back from the
pit, still facing it, one, ten, twenty paces, my eyes almost starting
from my head, as though I expected to see the thing roll up from the
bottom of the pit under my very gaze. At last I turned my back to the
pit and strode out across the gorse-covered moorland toward my home. As
I reached the road that winds from St. Gildas to St. Julien I gave one
hasty glance at the pit over my shoulder. The sun shone hot on the sod
about the excavation. There was something white and bare and round on
the turf at the edge of the pit. It might have been a stone; there were
plenty of them lying about.


II

When I entered my garden I saw Mome sprawling on the stone doorstep. He
eyed me sideways and flopped his tail.

"Are you not mortified, you idiot dog?" I said, looking about the upper
windows for Lys.

Mome rolled over on his back and raised one deprecating forepaw, as
though to ward off calamity.

"Don't act as though I was in the habit of beating you to death," I
said, disgusted. I had never in my life raised whip to the brute. "But
you are a fool dog," I continued. "No, you needn't come to be babied and
wept over; Lys can do that, if she insists, but I am ashamed of you, and
you can go to the devil."

Mome slunk off into the house, and I followed, mounting directly to my
wife's boudoir. It was empty.

"Where has she gone?" I said, looking hard at Mome, who had followed me.
"Oh! I see you don't know. Don't pretend you do. Come off that lounge!
Do you think Lys wants tan-colored hairs all over her lounge?"

I rang the bell for Catherine and Fine, but they didn't know where
"madame" had gone; so I went into my room, bathed, exchanged my somewhat
grimy shooting clothes for a suit of warm, soft knickerbockers, and,
after lingering some extra moments over my toilet--for I was particular,
now that I had married Lys--I went down to the garden and took a chair
out under the fig-trees.

"Where can she be?" I wondered, Mome came sneaking out to be comforted,
and I forgave him for Lys's sake, whereupon he frisked.

"You bounding cur," said I, "now what on earth started you off across
the moor? If you do it again I'll push you along with a charge of dust
shot."

As yet I had scarcely dared think about the ghastly hallucination of
which I had been a victim, but now I faced it squarely, flushing a
little with mortification at the thought of my hasty retreat from the
gravel pit.

"To think," I said aloud, "that those old woman's tales of Max Fortin
and Le Bihan should have actually made me see what didn't exist at all!
I lost my nerve like a schoolboy in a dark bedroom." For I knew now that
I had mistaken a round stone for a skull each time, and had pushed a
couple of big pebbles into the pit instead of the skull itself.

"By jingo!" said I, "I'm nervous; my liver must be in a devil of a
condition if I see such things when I'm awake! Lys will know what to
give me."

I felt mortified and irritated and sulky, and thought disgustedly of Le
Bihan and Max Fortin.

But after a while I ceased speculating, dismissed the mayor, the
chemist, and the skull from my mind, and smoked pensively, watching the
sun low dipping in the western ocean. As the twilight fell for a moment
over ocean and moorland, a wistful, restless happiness filled my heart,
the happiness that all men know--all men who have loved.

Slowly the purple mist crept out over the sea; the cliffs darkened; the
forest was shrouded.

Suddenly the sky above burned with the afterglow, and the world was
alight again.

Cloud after cloud caught the rose dye; the cliffs were tinted with it;
moor and pasture, heather and forest burned and pulsated with the
gentle flush. I saw the gulls turning and tossing above the sand bar,
their snowy wings tipped with pink; I saw the sea swallows sheering the
surface of the still river, stained to its placid depths with warm
reflections of the clouds. The twitter of drowsy hedge birds broke out
in the stillness; a salmon rolled its shining side above tidewater.

The interminable monotone of the ocean intensified the silence. I sat
motionless, holding my breath as one who listens to the first low rumor
of an organ. All at once the pure whistle of a nightingale cut the
silence, and the first moonbeam silvered the wastes of mist-hung waters.

I raised my head.

Lys stood before me in the garden.

When we had kissed each other, we linked arms and moved up and down the
gravel walks, watching the moonbeams sparkle on the sand bar as the tide
ebbed and ebbed. The broad beds of white pinks about us were atremble
with hovering white moths; the October roses hung all abloom, perfuming
the salt wind.

"Sweetheart," I said, "where is Yvonne? Has she promised to spend
Christmas with us?"

"Yes, Dick; she drove me down from Plougat this afternoon. She sent her
love to you. I am not jealous. What did you shoot?"

"A hare and four partridges. They are in the gun room. I told Catherine
not to touch them until you had seen them."

Now I suppose I knew that Lys could not be particularly enthusiastic
over game or guns; but she pretended she was, and always scornfully
denied that it was for my sake and not for the pure love of sport. So
she dragged me off to inspect the rather meager game bag, and she paid
me pretty compliments, and gave a little cry of delight and pity as I
lifted the enormous hare out of the sack by his ears.

"He'll eat no more of our lettuce," I said attempting to justify the
assassination.

"Unhappy little bunny--and what a beauty! O Dick, you are a splendid
shot, are you not?"

I evaded the question and hauled out a partridge.

"Poor little dead things'" said Lys in a whisper; "it seems a
pity--doesn't it, Dick? But then you are so clever----"

"We'll have them broiled," I said guardedly, "tell Catherine."

Catherine came in to take away the game, and presently 'Fine Lelocard,
Lys's maid, announced dinner, and Lys tripped away to her boudoir.

I stood an instant contemplating her blissfully, thinking, "My boy,
you're the happiest fellow in the world--you're in love with your wife'"

I walked into the dining-room, beamed at the plates, walked out again;
met Tregunc in the hallway, beamed on him; glanced into the kitchen,
beamed at Catherine, and went up stairs, still beaming.

Before I could knock at Lys's door it opened, and Lys came hastily out.
When she saw me she gave a little cry of relief, and nestled close to my
breast.

"There is something peering in at my window," she said.

"What!" I cried angrily.

"A man, I think, disguised as a priest, and he has a mask on. He must
have climbed up by the bay tree."

I was down the stairs and out of doors in no time. The moonlit garden
was absolutely deserted. Tregunc came up, and together we searched the
hedge and shrubbery around the house and out to the road.

"Jean Marie," said I at length, "loose my bulldog--he knows you--and
take your supper on the porch where you can watch. My wife says the
fellow is disguised as a priest, and wears a mask."

Tregunc showed his white teeth in a smile. "He will not care to venture
in here again, I think, Monsieur Darrel."

I went back and found Lys seated quietly at the table.

"The soup is ready, dear," she said. "Don't worry; it was only some
foolish lout from Bannalec. No one in St. Gildas or St. Julien would do
such a thing."

I was too much exasperated to reply at first, but Lys treated it as a
stupid joke, and after a while I began to look at it in that light.

Lys told me about Yvonne, and reminded me of my promise to have Herbert
Stuart down to meet her.

"You wicked diplomat!" I protested. "Herbert is in Paris, and hard at
work for the Salon."

"Don't you think he might spare a week to flirt with the prettiest girl
in Finistere?" inquired Lys innocently.

"Prettiest girl! Not much!" I said.

"Who is, then?" urged Lys.

I laughed a trifle sheepishly.

"I suppose you mean me, Dick," said Lys, coloring up.

"Now I bore you, don't I?"

"Bore me? Ah, no, Dick."

After coffee and cigarettes were served I spoke about Tregunc, and Lys
approved.

"Poor Jean! He will be glad, won't he? What a dear fellow you are!"

"Nonsense," said I; "we need a gardener; you said so yourself, Lys."

But Lys leaned over and kissed me, and then bent down and hugged
Mome--who whistled through his nose in sentimental appreciation.

"I am a very happy woman," said Lys.

"Mome was a very bad dog to-day," I observed.

"Poor Mome!" said Lys, smiling.

When dinner was over and Mome lay snoring before the blaze--for the
October nights are often chilly in Finistere--Lys curled up in the
chimney corner with her embroidery, and gave me a swift glance from
under her dropping lashes.

"You look like a schoolgirl, Lys," I said teasingly. "I don't believe
you are sixteen yet."

She pushed back her heavy burnished hair thoughtfully. Her wrist was as
white as surf foam.

"Have we been married four years? I don't believe it," I said.

She gave me another swift glance and touched the embroidery on her knee,
smiling faintly.

"I see," said I, also smiling at the embroidered garment. "Do you think
it will fit?"

"Fit?" repeated Lys. Then she laughed

"And," I persisted, "are you perfectly sure that you--er--we shall need
it?"

"Perfectly," said Lys. A delicate color touched her cheeks and neck. She
held up the little garment, all fluffy with misty lace and wrought with
quaint embroidery.

"It is very gorgeous," said I; "don't use your eyes too much, dearest.
May I smoke a pipe?"

"Of course," she said selecting a skein of pale blue silk.

For a while I sat and smoked in silence, watching her slender fingers
among the tinted silks and thread of gold.

Presently she spoke: "What did you say your crest is, Dick?"

"My crest? Oh, something or other rampant on a something or other----"

"Dick!"

"Dearest?"

"Don't be flippant."

"But I really forget. It's an ordinary crest; everybody in New York has
them. No family should be without 'em."

"You are disagreeable, Dick. Send Josephine upstairs for my album."

"Are you going to put that crest on the--the--whatever it is?"

"I am; and my own crest, too."

I thought of the Purple Emperor and wondered a little.

"You didn't know I had one, did you?" she smiled.

"What is it?" I replied evasively.

"You shall see. Ring for Josephine."

I rang, and, when 'Fine appeared, Lys gave her some orders in a low
voice, and Josephine trotted away, bobbing her white-coiffed head with a
"Bien, Madame!"

After a few minutes she returned, bearing a tattered, musty volume, from
which the gold and blue had mostly disappeared.

I took the book in my hands and examined the ancient emblazoned covers.

"Lilies!" I exclaimed.

"Fleur-de-lis," said my wife demurely.

"Oh!" said I, astonished, and opened the book.

"You have never before seen this book?" asked Lys, with a touch of
malice in her eyes.

"You know I haven't. Hello! What's this? Oho! So there should be a de
before Trevec? Lys de Trevec? Then why in the world did the Purple
Emperor----"

"Dick!" cried Lys.

"All right," said I. "Shall I read about the Sieur de Trevec who rode to
Saladin's tent alone to seek for medicine for St. Louise? Or shall I
read about--what is it? Oh, here it is, all down in black and
white--about the Marquis de Trevec who drowned himself before Alva's
eyes rather than surrender the banner of the fleur-de-lis to Spain? It's
all written here. But, dear, how about that soldier named Trevec who was
killed in the old fort on the cliff yonder?"

"He dropped the de, and the Trevecs since then have been Republicans,"
said Lys--"all except me."

"That's quite right," said I; "it is time that we Republicans should
agree upon some feudal system. My dear, I drink to the king!" and I
raised my wine glass and looked at Lys.

"To the king," said Lys, flushing. She smoothed out the tiny garment on
her knees; she touched the glass with her lips; her eyes were very
sweet. I drained the glass to the king.

After a silence I said: "I will tell the king stories. His majesty shall
be amused."

"His majesty," repeated Lys softly.

"Or hers," I laughed. "Who knows?"

"Who knows?" murmured Lys; with a gentle sigh.

"I know some stories about Jack the Giant-Killer," I announced. "Do
you, Lys?"

"I? No, not about a giant-killer, but I know all about the werewolf, and
Jeanne-la-Flamme, and the Man in Purple Tatters, and--O dear me, I know
lots more."

"You are very wise," said I. "I shall teach his majesty, English."

"And I Breton," cried Lys jealously.

"I shall bring playthings to the king," said I--"big green lizards from
the gorse, little gray mullets to swim in glass globes, baby rabbits
from the forest of Kerselec----"

"And I," said Lys, "will bring the first primrose, the first branch of
aubepine, the first jonquil, to the king--my king."

"Our king," said I; and there was peace in Finistere.

I lay back, idly turning the leaves of the curious old volume.

"I am looking," said I, "for the crest."

"The crest, dear? It is a priest's head with an arrow-shaped mark on the
forehead, on a field----"

I sat up and stared at my wife.

"Dick, whatever is the matter?" she smiled. "The story is there in that
book. Do you care to read it? No? Shall I tell it to you? Well, then: It
happened in the third crusade. There was a monk whom men called the
Black Priest. He turned apostate, and sold himself to the enemies of
Christ. A Sieur de Trevec burst into the Saracen camp, at the head of
only one hundred lances, and carried the Black Priest away out of the
very midst of their army."

"So that is how you come by the crest," I said quietly; but I thought of
the branded skull in the gravel pit, and wondered.

"Yes," said Lys. "The Sieur de Trevec cut the Black Priest's head off,
but first he branded him with an arrow mark on the forehead. The book
says it was a pious action, and the Sieur de Trevec got great merit by
it. But I think it was cruel, the branding," she sighed.

"Did you ever hear of any other Black Priest?"

"Yes. There was one in the last century, here in St. Gildas. He cast a
white shadow in the sun. He wrote in the Breton language. Chronicles,
too, I believe. I never saw them. His name was the same as that of the
old chronicler, and of the other priest, Jacques Sorgue. Some said he
was a lineal descendant of the traitor. Of course the first Black Priest
was bad enough for anything. But if he did have a child, it need not
have been the ancestor of the last Jacques Sorgue. They say he was so
good he was not allowed to die, but was caught up to heaven one day,"
added Lys, with believing eyes.

I smiled.

"But he disappeared," persisted Lys.

"I'm afraid his journey was in another direction," I said jestingly, and
thoughtlessly told her the story of the morning. I had utterly
forgotten the masked man at her window, but before I finished I
remembered him fast enough, and realized what I had done as I saw her
face whiten.

"Lys," I urged tenderly, "that was only some clumsy clown's trick. You
said so yourself. You are not superstitious, my dear?"

Her eyes were on mine. She slowly drew the little gold cross from her
bosom and kissed it. But her lips trembled as they pressed the symbol of
faith.


III

About nine o'clock the next morning I walked into the Groix Inn and sat
down at the long discolored oaken table, nodding good-day to Marianne
Bruyere, who in turn bobbed her white coiffe at me.

"My clever Bannalec maid," said I, "what is good for a stirrup-cup at
the Groix Inn?"

"Schist?" she inquired in Breton.

"With a dash of red wine, then," I replied.

She brought the delicious Quimperle cider, and I poured a little
Bordeaux into it. Marianne watched me with laughing black eyes.

"What makes your cheeks so red, Marianne?" I asked. "Has Jean Marie been
here?"

"We are to be married, Monsieur Darrel," she laughed.

"Ah! Since when has Jean Marie Tregunc lost his head?"

"His head? Oh, Monsieur Darrel--his heart, you mean!"

"So I do," said I. "Jean Marie is a practical fellow."

"It is all due to your kindness--" began the girl, but I raised my hand
and held up the glass.

"It's due to himself. To your happiness, Marianne"; and I took a hearty
draught of the schist. "Now," said I, "tell me where I can find Le Bihan
and Max Fortin."

"Monsieur Le Bihan and Monsieur Fortin are above in the broad room. I
believe they are examining the Red Admiral's effects."

"To send them to Paris? Oh, I know. May I go up, Marianne?"

"And God go with you," smiled the girl.

When I knocked at the door of the broad room above little Max Fortin
opened it. Dust covered his spectacles and nose; his hat, with the tiny
velvet ribbons fluttering, was all awry.

"Come in, Monsieur Darrel," he said; "the mayor and I are packing up the
effects of the Purple Emperor and of the poor Red Admiral."

"The collections?" I asked, entering the room. "You must be very careful
in packing those butterfly cases; the slightest jar might break wings
and antennas, you know."

Le Bihan shook hands with me and pointed to the great pile of boxes.

"They're all cork lined," he said, "but Fortin and I are putting felt
around each box. The Entomological Society of Paris pays the freight."

The combined collection of the Red Admiral and the Purple Emperor made a
magnificent display.

I lifted and inspected case after case set with gorgeous butterflies and
moths, each specimen carefully labelled with the name in Latin. There
were cases filled with crimson tiger moths all aflame with color; cases
devoted to the common yellow butterflies; symphonies in orange and pale
yellow; cases of soft gray and dun-colored sphinx moths; and cases of
grayish nettle-bed butterflies of the numerous family of Vanessa.

All alone in a great case by itself was pinned the purple emperor, the
Apatura Iris, that fatal specimen that had given the Purple Emperor his
name and quietus.

I remembered the butterfly, and stood looking at it with bent eyebrows.

Le Bihan glanced up from the floor where he was nailing down the lid of
a box full of cases.

"It is settled, then," said he, "that madame, your wife, gives the
Purple Emperor's entire Collection to the city of Paris?"

I nodded.

"Without accepting anything for it?"

"It is a gift," I said.

"Including the purple emperor there in the case? That butterfly is
worth a great deal of money," persisted Le Bihan.

"You don't suppose that we would wish to sell that specimen, do you?" I
answered a trifle sharply.

"If I were you I should destroy it," said the mayor in his high-pitched
voice.

"That would be nonsense," said I, "like your burying the brass cylinder
and scroll yesterday."

"It was not nonsense," said Le Bihan doggedly, "and I should prefer not
to discuss the subject of the scroll."

I looked at Max Portin, who immediately avoided my eyes.

"You are a pair of superstitious old women," said I, digging my hands
into my pockets; "you swallow every nursery tale that is invented."

"What of it?" said Le Bihan sulkily; "there's more truth than lies in
most of 'em."

"Oh!" I sneered, "does the Mayor of St. Gildas and St. Julien believe in
the loup-garou?"

"No, not in the loup-garou."

"In what, then--Jeanne-la-Flamme?"

"That," said Le Bihan with conviction, "is history."

"The devil it is!" said I; "and perhaps, Monsieur the mayor, your faith
in giants is unimpaired?"

"There were giants--everybody knows it," growled Max Fortin.

"And you a chemist!" I observed scornfully.

"Listen, Monsieur Darrel," squeaked Le Bihan; "you know yourself that
the Purple Emperor was a scientific man. Now suppose I should tell you
that he always refused to include in his collection a Death's
Messenger?"

"A what?" I exclaimed.

"You know what I mean--that moth that flies by night; some call it the
Death's Head, but in St. Gildas we call it 'Death's Messenger.'"

"Oh!" said I, "you mean that big sphinx moth that is commonly known as
the 'death's-head moth.' Why the mischief should the people here call it
death's messenger?"

"For hundreds of years it has been known as death's messenger in St.
Gildas," said Max Fortin. "Even Froissart speaks of it in his
commentaries on Jacques Sorgue's _Chronicles_. The book is in your
library."

"Sorgue? And who was Jacques Sorgue? I never read his book."

"Jacques Sorgue [Transcriber's note: the original reads "Sorque"] was the
son of some unfrocked priest--I forget. It was during the crusades."

"Good Heavens!" I burst out, "I've been hearing of nothing but crusades
and priests and death and sorcery ever since I kicked that skull into
the gravel pit, and I am tired of it, I tell you frankly. One would
think we lived in the dark ages. Do you know what year of our Lord it
is, Le Bihan?"

"Eighteen hundred and ninety-six," replied the mayor.

"And yet you two hulking men are afraid of a death's-head moth."

"I don't care to have one fly into the window," said Max Fortin; "it
means evil to the house and the people in it."

"God alone knows why he marked one of his creatures with a yellow
death's head on the back," observed Le Bihan piously, "but I take it
that he meant it as a warning; and I propose to profit by it," he added
triumphantly.

"See here, Le Bihan," I said; "by a stretch of imagination one can make
out a skull on the thorax of a certain big sphinx moth. What of it?"

"It is a bad thing to touch," said the mayor wagging his head.

"It squeaks when handled," added Max Fortin.

"Some creatures squeak all the time," I observed, looking hard at Le
Bihan.

"Pigs," added the mayor.

"Yes, and asses," I replied. "Listen, Le Bihan: do you mean to tell me
that you saw that skull roll uphill yesterday?"

The mayor shut his mouth tightly and picked up his hammer.

"Don't be obstinate," I said; "I asked you a question."

"And I refuse to answer," snapped Le Bihan. "Fortin saw what I saw; let
him talk about it."

I looked searchingly at the little chemist.

"I don't say that I saw it actually roll up out of the pit, all by
itself," said Fortin with a shiver, "but--but then, how did it come up
out of the pit, if it didn't roll up all by itself?"

"It didn't come up at all; that was a yellow cobblestone that you
mistook for the skull again," I replied. "You were nervous, Max."

"A--a very curious cobblestone, Monsieur Darrel," said Fortin.

"I also was a victim to the same hallucination," I continued, "and I
regret to say that I took the trouble to roll two innocent cobblestones
into the gravel pit, imagining each time that it was the skull I was
rolling."

"It was," observed Le Bihan with a morose shrug.

"It just shows," said I, ignoring the mayor's remark, "how easy it is to
fix up a train of coincidences so that the result seems to savor of the
supernatural. Now, last night my wife imagined that she saw a priest in
a mask peer in at her window----"

Fortin and Le Bihan scrambled hastily from their knees, dropping hammer
and nails.

"W-h-a-t--what's that?" demanded the mayor.

I repeated what I had said. Max Fortin turned livid.

"My God!" muttered Le Bihan, "the Black Priest is in St. Gildas!"

"D-don't you--you know the old prophecy?" stammered Fortin; "Froissart
quotes it from Jacques Sorgue:

    "'When the Black Priest rises from the dead,
    St. Gildas folk shall shriek in bed;
    When the Black Priest rises from his grave,
    May the good God St. Gildas save!'"

"Aristide Le Bihan," I said angrily, "and you, Max Fortin, I've got
enough of this nonsense! Some foolish lout from Bannalec has been in St.
Gildas playing tricks to frighten old fools like you. If you have
nothing better to talk about than nursery legends I'll wait until you
come to your senses. Good-morning." And I walked out, more disturbed
than I cared to acknowledge to myself.

The day had become misty and overcast. Heavy, wet clouds hung in the
east. I heard the surf thundering against the cliffs, and the gray gulls
squealed as they tossed and turned high in the sky. The tide was
creeping across the river sands, higher, higher, and I saw the seaweed
floating on the beach, and the lancons springing from the foam, silvery
threadlike flashes in the gloom. Curlew were flying up the river in twos
and threes; the timid sea swallows skimmed across the moors toward some
quiet, lonely pool, safe from the coming tempest. In every hedge field
birds were gathering, huddling together, twittering restlessly.

When I reached the cliffs I sat down, resting my chin on my clenched
hands. Already a vast curtain of rain, sweeping across the ocean miles
away, hid the island of Groix. To the east, behind the white semaphore
on the hills, black clouds crowded up over the horizon. After a little
the thunder boomed, dull, distant, and slender skeins of lightning
unraveled across the crest of the coming storm. Under the cliff at my
feet the surf rushed foaming over the shore, and the lancons jumped and
skipped and quivered until they seemed to be but the reflections of the
meshed lightning.

I turned to the east. It was raining over Groix, it was raining at
Sainte Barbe, it was raining now at the semaphore. High in the storm
whirl a few gulls pitched; a nearer cloud trailed veils of rain in its
wake; the sky was spattered with lightning; the thunder boomed.

As I rose to go, a cold raindrop fell upon the back of my hand, and
another, and yet another on my face. I gave a last glance at the sea,
where the waves were bursting into strange white shapes that seemed to
fling out menacing arms toward me. Then something moved on the cliff,
something black as the black rock it clutched--a filthy cormorant,
craning its hideous head at the sky.

Slowly I plodded homeward across the somber moorland, where the gorse
stems glimmered with a dull metallic green, and the heather, no longer
violet and purple, hung drenched and dun-colored among the dreary rocks.
The wet turf creaked under my heavy boots, the black-thorn scraped and
grated against knee and elbow. Over all lay a strange light, pallid,
ghastly, where the sea spray whirled across the landscape and drove into
my face until it grew numb with the cold. In broad bands, rank after
rank, billow on billow, the rain burst out across the endless moors, and
yet there was no wind to drive it at such a pace.

Lys stood at the door as I turned into the garden, motioning me to
hasten; and then for the first time I became conscious that I was soaked
to the skin.

"However in the world did you come to stay out when such a storm
threatened?" she said. "Oh, you are dripping! Go quickly and change; I
have laid your warm underwear on the bed, Dick."

I kissed my wife, and went upstairs to change my dripping clothes for
something more comfortable.

When I returned to the morning room there was a driftwood fire on the
hearth, and Lys sat in the chimney corner embroidering.

"Catherine tells me that the fishing fleet from Lorient is out. Do you
think they are in danger, dear?" asked Lys, raising her blue eyes to
mine as I entered.

"There is no wind, and there will be no sea," said I, looking out of the
window. Far across the moor I could see the black cliffs looming in the
mist.

"How it rains!" murmured Lys; "come to the fire, Dick."

I threw myself on the fur rug, my hands in my pockets, my head on Lys's
knees.

"Tell me a story," I said. "I feel like a boy of ten."

Lys raised a finger to her scarlet lips. I always waited for her to do
that.

"Will you be very still, then?" she said.

"Still as death."

"Death," echoed a voice, very softly.

"Did you speak, Lys?" I asked, turning so that I could see her face.

"No; did you, Dick?"

"Who said 'death'?" I asked, startled.

"Death," echoed a voice, softly.

I sprang up and looked about. Lys rose too, her needles and embroidery
falling to the floor. She seemed about to faint, leaning heavily on me,
and I led her to the window and opened it a little way to give her air.
As I did so the chain lightning split the zenith, the thunder crashed,
and a sheet of rain swept into the room, driving with it something that
fluttered--something that flapped, and squeaked, and beat upon the rug
with soft, moist wings.

We bent over it together, Lys clinging to me, and we saw that it was a
death's-head moth drenched with rain.

The dark day passed slowly as we sat beside the fire, hand in hand, her
head against my breast, speaking of sorrow and mystery and death. For
Lys believed that there were things on earth that none might understand,
things that must be nameless forever and ever, until God rolls up the
scroll of life and all is ended. We spoke of hope and fear and faith,
and the mystery of the saints; we spoke of the beginning and the end, of
the shadow of sin, of omens, and of love. The moth still lay on the
floor quivering its somber wings in the warmth of the fire, the skull
and ribs clearly etched upon its neck and body.

"If it is a messenger of death to this house," I said, "why should we
fear, Lys?"

"Death should be welcome to those who love God," murmured Lys, and she
drew the cross from her breast and kissed it.

"The moth might die if I threw it out into the storm," I said after a
silence.

"Let it remain," sighed Lys.

Late that night my wife lay sleeping, and I sat beside her bed and read
in the Chronicle of Jacques Sorgue. I shaded the candle, but Lys grew
restless, and finally I took the book down into the morning room, where
the ashes of the fire rustled and whitened on the hearth.

The death's-head moth lay on the rug before the fire where I had left
it. At first I thought it was dead, but when I looked closer I saw a
lambent fire in its amber eyes. The straight white shadow it cast across
the floor wavered as the candle flickered.

The pages of the Chronicle of Jacques Sorgue were damp and sticky; the
illuminated gold and blue initials left flakes of azure and gilt where
my hand brushed them.

"It is not paper at all; it is thin parchment," I said to myself; and I
held the discolored page close to the candle flame and read, translating
laboriously:

"I, Jacques Sorgue, saw all these things. And I saw the Black Mass
celebrated in the chapel of St. Gildas-on-the-Cliff. And it was said by
the Abbe Sorgue, my kinsman: for which deadly sin the apostate priest
was seized by the most noble Marquis of Plougastel and by him condemned
to be burned with hot irons, until his seared soul quit its body and fly
to its master the devil. But when the Black Priest lay in the crypt of
Plougastel, his master Satan came at night and set him free, and carried
him across land and sea to Mahmoud, which is Soldan or Saladin. And I,
Jacques Sorgue, traveling afterward by sea, beheld with my own eyes my
kinsman, the Black Priest of St. Gildas, borne along in the air upon a
vast black wing, which was the wing of his master Satan. And this was
seen also by two men of the crew."

I turned the page. The wings of the moth on the floor began to quiver. I
read on and on, my eyes blurring under the shifting candle flame. I read
of battles and of saints, and I learned how the Great Soldan made his
pact with Satan, and then I came to the Sieur de Trevec, and read how he
seized the Black Priest in the midst of Saladin's tents and carried him
away and cut off his head first branding him on the forehead. "And
before he suffered," said the Chronicle, "he cursed the Sieur de Trevec
and his descendants, and he said he would surely return to St. Gildas.
'For the violence you do to me, I will do violence to you. For the evil
I suffer at your hands, I will work evil on you and your descendants.
Woe to your children, Sieur de Trevec!'" There was a whirr, a beating of
strong wings, and my candle flashed up as in a sudden breeze. A humming
filled the room; the great moth darted hither and thither, beating,
buzzing, on ceiling and wall. I flung down my book and stepped forward.
Now it lay fluttering upon the window sill, and for a moment I had it
under my hand, but the thing squeaked and I shrank back. Then suddenly
it darted across the candle flame; the light flared and went out, and at
the same moment a shadow moved in the darkness outside. I raised my eyes
to the window. A masked face was peering in at me.

Quick as thought I whipped out my revolver and fired every cartridge,
but the face advanced beyond the window, the glass melting away before
it like mist, and through the smoke of my revolver I saw something creep
swiftly into the room. Then I tried to cry out, but the thing was at my
throat, and I fell backward among the ashes of the hearth.

       *       *       *       *       *

When my eyes unclosed I was lying on the hearth, my head among the cold
ashes. Slowly I got on my knees, rose painfully, and groped my way to a
chair. On the floor lay my revolver, shining in the pale light of early
morning. My mind clearing by degrees, I looked, shuddering, at the
window. The glass was unbroken. I stooped stiffly, picked up my revolver
and opened the cylinder. Every cartridge had been fired. Mechanically I
closed the cylinder and placed the revolver in my pocket. The book, the
Chronicles of Jacques Sorgue, lay on the table beside me, and as I
started to close it I glanced at the page. It was all splashed with
rain, and the lettering had run, so that the page was merely a confused
blur of gold and red and black. As I stumbled toward the door I cast a
fearful glance over my shoulder. The death's-head moth crawled shivering
on the rug.


IV

The sun was about three hours high. I must have slept, for I was aroused
by the sudden gallop of horses under our window. People were shouting
and calling in the road. I sprang up and opened the sash. Le Bihan was
there, an image of helplessness, and Max Fortin stood beside him
polishing his glasses. Some gendarmes had just arrived from Quimperle,
and I could hear them around the corner of the house, stamping, and
rattling their sabres and carbines, as they led their horses into my
stable.

Lys sat up, murmuring half-sleepy, half-anxious questions.

"I don't know," I answered. "I am going out to see what it means."

"It is like the day they came to arrest you," Lys said, giving me a
troubled look. But I kissed her and laughed at her until she smiled too.
Then I flung on coat and cap and hurried down the stairs.

The first person I saw standing in the road was the Brigadier Durand.

"Hello!" said I, "have you come to arrest me again? What the devil is
all this fuss about, anyway?"

"We were telegraphed for an hour ago," said Durand briskly, "and for a
sufficient reason, I think. Look there, Monsieur Darrel!"

He pointed to the ground almost under my feet.

"Good heavens!" I cried, "where did that puddle of blood come from?"

"That's what I want to know, Monsieur Darrel. Max Fortin found it at
daybreak. See, it's splashed all over the grass, too. A trail of it
leads into your garden, across the flower beds to your very window, the
one that opens from the morning room. There is another trail leading
from this spot across the road to the cliffs, then to the gravel pit,
and thence across the moor to the forest of Kerselec. We are going to
mount in a minute and search the bosquets. Will you join us? Bon Dieu!
but the fellow bled like an ox. Max Fortin says it's human blood, or I
should not have believed it."

The little chemist of Quimperle came up at that moment, rubbing his
glasses with a colored handkerchief.

"Yes, it is human blood," he said, "but one thing puzzles me: the
corpuscles are yellow. I never saw any human blood before with yellow
corpuscles. But your English Doctor Thompson asserts that he has----"

"Well, it's human blood, anyway--isn't it?" insisted Durand,
impatiently.

"Ye-es," admitted Max Fortin.

"Then it's my business to trail it," said the big gendarme, and he
called his men and gave the order to mount.

"Did you hear anything last night?" asked Durand of me.

"I heard the rain. I wonder the rain did not wash away these traces."

"They must have come after the rain ceased. See this thick splash, how
it lies over and weighs down the wet grass blades. Pah!"

It was a heavy, evil-looking clot, and I stepped back from it, my throat
closing in disgust.

"My theory," said the brigadier, "is this: Some of those Biribi
fishermen, probably the Icelanders, got an extra glass of cognac into
their hides and quarreled on the road. Some of them were slashed, and
staggered to your house. But there is only one trail, and yet--and yet,
how could all that blood come from only one person? Well, the wounded
man, let us say, staggered first to your house and then back here, and
he wandered off, drunk and dying, God knows where. That's my theory."

"A very good one," said I calmly. "And you are going to trail him?"

"Yes."

"When?"

"At once. Will you come?"

"Not now. I'll gallop over by-and-bye. You are going to the edge of the
Kerselec forest?"

"Yes; you will hear us calling. Are you coming, Max Fortin? And you, Le
Bihan? Good; take the dog-cart."

The big gendarme tramped around the corner to the stable and presently
returned mounted on a strong gray horse, his sabre shone on his saddle;
his pale yellow and white facings were spotless. The little crowd of
white-coiffed women with their children fell back as Durand touched
spurs and clattered away followed by his two troopers. Soon after Le
Bihan and Max Fortin also departed in the mayor's dingy dog-cart.

"Are you coming?" piped Le Bihan shrilly.

"In a quarter of an hour," I replied, and went back to the house.

When I opened the door of the morning room the death's-head moth was
beating its strong wings against the window. For a second I hesitated,
then walked over and opened the sash. The creature fluttered out,
whirred over the flower beds a moment, then darted across the moorland
toward the sea. I called the servants together and questioned them.
Josephine, Catherine, Jean Marie Tregunc, not one of them had heard the
slightest disturbance during the night. Then I told Jean Marie to saddle
my horse, and while I was speaking Lys came down.

"Dearest," I began, going to her.

"You must tell me everything you know, Dick," she interrupted, looking
me earnestly in the face.

"But there is nothing to tell--only a drunken brawl, and some one
wounded."

"And you are going to ride--where, Dick?"

"Well, over to the edge of Kerselec forest. Durand and the mayor, and
Max Fortin, have gone on, following a--a trail."

"What trail?"

"Some blood."

"Where did they find it?"

"Out in the road there." Lys crossed herself.

"Does it come near our house?"

"Yes."

"How near?"

"It comes up to the morning room window," said I, giving in.

Her hand on my arm grew heavy. "I dreamed last night----"

"So did I--" but I thought of the empty cartridges in my revolver, and
stopped.

"I dreamed that you were in great danger, and I could not move hand or
foot to save you; but you had your revolver, and I called out to you to
fire----"

"I did fire!" I cried excitedly.

"You--you fired?"

I took her in my arms. "My darling," I said "something strange has
happened--something that I cannot understand as yet. But, of course,
there is an explanation. Last night I thought I fired at the Black
Priest."

"Ah!" gasped Lys.

"Is that what you dreamed?"

"Yes, yes, that was it! I begged you to fire----"

"And I did."

Her heart was beating against my breast. I held her close in silence.

"Dick," she said at length, "perhaps you killed the--the thing."

"If it was human I did not miss," I answered grimly. "And it was human,"
I went on, pulling myself together, ashamed of having so nearly gone to
pieces. "Of course it was human! The whole affair is plain enough. Not a
drunken brawl, as Durand thinks; it was a drunken lout's practical joke,
for which he has suffered. I suppose I must have filled him pretty full
of bullets, and he has crawled away to die in Kerselec forest. It's a
terrible affair; I'm sorry I fired so hastily; but that idiot Le Bihan
and Max Fortin have been working on my nerves till I am as hysterical as
a schoolgirl," I ended angrily.

"You fired--but the window glass was not shattered," said Lys in a low
voice.

"Well, the window was open, then. And as for the--the rest--I've got
nervous indigestion, and a doctor will settle the Black Priest for me,
Lys."

I glanced out of the window at Tregunc waiting with my horse at the
gate.

"Dearest, I think I had better go to join Durand and the others."

"I will go, too."

"Oh, no!"

"Yes, Dick."

"Don't, Lys."

"I shall suffer every moment you are away."

"The ride is too fatiguing, and we can't tell what unpleasant sight you
may come upon. Lys, you don't really think there is anything
supernatural in this affair?"

"Dick," she answered gently, "I am a Bretonne." With both arms around my
neck, my wife said, "Death is the gift of God. I do not fear it when we
are together. But alone--oh, my husband, I should fear a God who could
take you away from me!"

We kissed each other soberly, simply, like two children. Then Lys
hurried away to change her gown, and I paced up and down the garden
waiting for her.

She came, drawing on her slender gauntlets. I swung her into the saddle,
gave a hasty order to Jean Marie, and mounted.

Now, to quail under thoughts of terror on a morning like this, with Lys
in the saddle beside me, no matter what had happened or might happen
was impossible. Moreover, Mome came sneaking after us. I asked Tregunc
to catch him, for I was afraid he might be brained by our horses' hoofs
if he followed, but the wily puppy dodged and bolted after Lys, who was
trotting along the highroad. "Never mind," I thought; "if he's hit he'll
live, for he has no brains to lose."

Lys was waiting for me in the road beside the Shrine of Our Lady of St.
Gildas when I joined her. She crossed herself, I doffed my cap, then we
shook out our bridles and galloped toward the forest of Kerselec.

We said very little as we rode. I always loved to watch Lys in the
saddle. Her exquisite figure and lovely face were the incarnation of
youth and grace; her curling hair glistened like threaded gold.

Out of the corner of my eye I saw the spoiled puppy Mome come bounding
cheerfully alongside, oblivious of our horses' heels. Our road swung
close to the cliffs. A filthy cormorant rose from the black rocks and
flapped heavily across our path. Lys's horse reared, but she pulled him
down, and pointed at the bird with her riding crop.

"I see," said I; "it seems to be going our way. Curious to see a
cormorant in a forest, isn't it?"

"It is a bad sign," said Lys. "You know the Morbihan proverb: 'When the
cormorant turns from the sea, Death laughs in the forest, and wise
woodsmen build boats.'"

"I wish," said I sincerely, "that there were fewer proverbs in
Brittany."

We were in sight of the forest now; across the gorse I could see the
sparkle of gendarmes' trappings, and the glitter of Le Bihan's
silver-buttoned jacket. The hedge was low and we took it without
difficulty, and trotted across the moor to where Le Bihan and Durand
stood gesticulating.

They bowed ceremoniously to Lys as we rode up.

"The trail is horrible--it is a river," said the mayor in his squeaky
voice. "Monsieur Darrel, I think perhaps madame would scarcely care to
come any nearer."

Lys drew bridle and looked at me.

"It is horrible!" said Durand, walking up beside me; "it looks as though
a bleeding regiment had passed this way. The trail winds and winds about
here in the thickets; we lose it at times, but we always find it again.
I can't understand how one man--no, nor twenty--could bleed like that!"

A halloo, answered by another, sounded from the depths of the forest.

"It's my men; they are following the trail," muttered the brigadier.
"God alone knows what is at the end!"

"Shall we gallop back, Lys?" I asked.

"No; let us ride along the western edge of the woods and dismount. The
sun is so hot now, and I should like to rest for a moment," she said.

"The western forest is clear of anything disagreeable," said Durand.

"Very well," I answered; "call me, Le Bihan, if you find anything."

Lys wheeled her mare, and I followed across the springy heather, Mome
trotting cheerfully in the rear.

We entered the sunny woods about a quarter of a kilometer from where we
left Durand. I took Lys from her horse, flung both bridles over a limb,
and, giving my wife my arm, aided her to a flat mossy rock which
overhung a shallow brook gurgling among the beech trees. Lys sat down
and drew off her gauntlets. Mome pushed his head into her lap, received
an undeserved caress, and came doubtfully toward me. I was weak enough
to condone his offense, but I made him lie down at my feet, greatly to
his disgust.

I rested my head on Lys's knees, looking up at the sky through the
crossed branches of the trees.

"I suppose I have killed him," I said. "It shocks me terribly, Lys."

"You could not have known, dear. He may have been a robber,
and--if--not--did--have you ever fired your revolver since that day four
years ago when the Red Admiral's son tried to kill you? But I know you
have not."

"No," said I, wondering. "It's a fact, I have not. Why?"

"And don't you remember that I asked you to let me load it for you the
day when Yves went off, swearing to kill you and his father?"

"Yes, I do remember. Well?"

"Well, I--I took the cartridges first to St. Gildas chapel and dipped
them in holy water. You must not laugh, Dick," said Lys gently, laying
her cool hands on my lips.

"Laugh, my darling!"

Overhead the October sky was pale amethyst, and the sunlight burned like
orange flame through the yellow leaves of beech and oak. Gnats and
midges danced and wavered overhead; a spider dropped from a twig halfway
to the ground and hung suspended on the end of his gossamer thread.

"Are you sleepy, dear?" asked Lys, bending over me.

"I am--a little; I scarcely slept two hours last night," I answered.

"You may sleep, if you wish," said Lys, and touched my eyes caressingly.

"Is my head heavy on your knees?"

"No, Dick."

I was already in a half doze; still I heard the brook babbling under the
beeches and the humming of forest flies overhead. Presently even these
were stilled.

The next thing I knew I was sitting bolt upright, my ears ringing with a
scream, and I saw Lys cowering beside me, covering her white face with
both hands.

As I sprang to my feet she cried again and clung to my knees. I saw my
dog rush growling into a thicket, then I heard him whimper, and he came
backing out, whining, ears flat, tail down. I stooped and disengaged
Lys's hand.

"Don't go, Dick!" she cried. "O God, it's the Black Priest!"

In a moment I had leaped across the brook and pushed my way into the
thicket. It was empty. I stared about me; I scanned every tree trunk,
every bush. Suddenly I saw him. He was seated on a fallen log, his head
resting in his hands, his rusty black robe gathered around him. For a
moment my hair stirred under my cap; sweat started on forehead and cheek
bone; then I recovered my reason, and understood that the man was human
and was probably wounded to death. Ay, to death; for there at my feet,
lay the wet trail of blood, over leaves and stones, down into the little
hollow, across to the figure in black resting silently under the trees.

I saw that he could not escape even if he had the strength, for before
him, almost at his very feet, lay a deep, shining swamp.

As I stepped forward my foot broke a twig. At the sound the figure
started a little, then its head fell forward again. Its face was masked.
Walking up to the man, I bade him tell where he was wounded. Durand and
the others broke through the thicket at the same moment and hurried to
my side.

"Who are you who hide a masked face in a priest's robe?" said the
gendarme loudly.

There was no answer.

"See--see the stiff blood all over his robe," muttered Le Bihan to
Fortin.

"He will not speak," said I.

"He may be too badly wounded," whispered Le Bihan.

"I saw him raise his head," I said, "my wife saw him creep up here."

Durand stepped forward and touched the figure.

"Speak!" he said.

"Speak!" quavered Fortin.

Durand waited a moment, then with a sudden upward movement he stripped
off the mask and threw back the man's head. We were looking into the eye
sockets of a skull. Durand stood rigid; the mayor shrieked. The skeleton
burst out from its rotting robes and collapsed on the ground before us.
From between the staring ribs and the grinning teeth spurted a torrent
of black blood, showering the shrinking grasses; then the thing
shuddered, and fell over into the black ooze of the bog. Little bubbles
of iridescent air appeared from the mud; the bones were slowly engulfed,
and, as the last fragments sank out of sight, up from the depths and
along the bank crept a creature, shiny, shivering, quivering its wings.

It was a death's-head moth.

       *       *       *       *       *

I wish I had time to tell you how Lys outgrew superstitions--for she
never knew the truth about the affair, and she never will know, since
she has promised not to read this book. I wish I might tell you about
the king and his coronation, and how the coronation robe fitted. I wish
that I were able to write how Yvonne and Herbert Stuart rode to a boar
hunt in Quimperle, and how the hounds raced the quarry right through the
town, overturning three gendarmes, the notary, and an old woman. But I
am becoming garrulous and Lys is calling me to come and hear the king
say that he is sleepy. And his highness shall not be kept waiting.


THE KING'S CRADLE SONG

      Seal with a seal of gold
      The scroll of a life unrolled;
    Swathe him deep in his purple stole;
    Ashes of diamonds, crystalled coal,
      Drops of gold in each scented fold.

    Crimson wings of the Little Death,
    Stir his hair with your silken breath;
    Flaming wings of sins to be,
    Splendid pinions of prophecy,
      Smother his eyes with hues and dyes,
    While the white moon spins and the winds arise,
      And the stars drip through the skies.

      Wave, O wings of the Little Death!
      Seal his sight and stifle his breath,
    Cover his breast with the gemmed shroud pressed;
    From north to north, from west to west,
      Wave, O wings of the Little Death!
    Till the white moon reels in the cracking skies,
      And the ghosts of God arise.



Lazarus

BY LEONID ANDREYEV

TRANSLATED BY ABRAHAM YARMOLINSKY

     From _Lazarus and the Gentleman from San Francisco_. Published by
     The Stratford Company. By permission of the publishers.


I

When Lazarus left the grave, where, for three days and three nights he
had been under the enigmatical sway of death, and returned alive to his
dwelling, for a long time no one noticed in him those sinister oddities,
which, as time went on, made his very name a terror. Gladdened
unspeakably by the sight of him who had been returned to life, those
near to him caressed him unceasingly, and satiated their burning desire
to serve him, in solicitude for his food and drink and garments. And
they dressed him gorgeously, in bright colors of hope and laughter, and
when, like to a bridegroom in his bridal vestures, he sat again among
them at the table, and again ate and drank, they wept, overwhelmed with
tenderness. And they summoned the neighbors to look at him who had risen
miraculously from the dead. These came and shared the serene joy of the
hosts. Strangers from far-off towns and hamlets came and adored the
miracle in tempestuous words. Like to a beehive was the house of Mary
and Martha.

Whatever was found new in Lazarus' face and gestures was thought to be
some trace of a grave illness and of the shocks recently experienced.
Evidently, the destruction wrought by death on the corpse was only
arrested by the miraculous power, but its effects were still apparent;
and what death had succeeded in doing with Lazarus' face and body, was
like an artist's unfinished sketch seen under thin glass. On Lazarus'
temples, under his eyes, and in the hollows of his cheeks, lay a deep
and cadaverous blueness; cadaverously blue also were his long fingers,
and around his fingernails, grown long in the grave, the blue had become
purple and dark. On his lips the skin, swollen in the grave, had burst
in places, and thin, reddish cracks were formed, shining as though
covered with transparent mica. And he had grown stout. His body, puffed
up in the grave, retained its monstrous size and showed those frightful
swellings, in which one sensed the presence of the rank liquid of
decomposition. But the heavy corpse-like odor which penetrated Lazarus'
graveclothes and, it seemed, his very body, soon entirely disappeared,
the blue spots on his face and hands grew paler, and the reddish cracks
closed up, although they never disappeared altogether. That is how
Lazarus looked when he appeared before people, in his second life, but
his face looked natural to those who had seen him in the coffin.

In addition to the changes in his appearance, Lazarus' temper seemed to
have undergone a transformation, but this circumstance startled no one
and attracted no attention. Before his death Lazarus had always been
cheerful and carefree, fond of laughter and a merry joke. It was because
of this brightness and cheerfulness, with not a touch of malice and
darkness, that the Master had grown so fond of him. But now Lazarus had
grown grave and taciturn, he never jested, himself, nor responded with
laughter to other people's jokes; and the words which he uttered, very
infrequently, were the plainest, most ordinary, and necessary words, as
deprived of depth and significance, as those sounds with which animals
express pain and pleasure, thirst and hunger. They were the words that
one can say all one's life, and yet they give no indication of what
pains and gladdens the depths of the soul.

Thus, with the face of a corpse which for three days had been under the
heavy sway of death, dark and taciturn, already appallingly transformed,
but still unrecognized by anyone in his new self, he was sitting at the
feasting table, among friends and relatives, and his gorgeous nuptial
garments glittered with yellow gold and bloody scarlet. Broad waves of
jubilation, now soft, now tempestuously sonorous surged around him; warm
glances of love were reaching out for his face, still cold with the
coldness of the grave; and a friend's warm palm caressed his blue, heavy
hand. And music played the tympanum and the pipe, the cithara and the
harp. It was as though bees hummed, grasshoppers chirped and birds
warbled over the happy house of Mary and Martha.


II

One of the guests incautiously lifted the veil. By a thoughtless word he
broke the serene charm and uncovered the truth in all its naked
ugliness. Ere the thought formed itself in his mind, his lips uttered
with a smile:

"Why dost thou not tell us what happened yonder?"

And all grew silent, startled by the question. It was as if it occurred
to them only now that for three days Lazarus had been dead, and they
looked at him, anxiously awaiting his answer. But Lazarus kept silence.

"Thou dost not wish to tell us,"--wondered the man, "is it so terrible
yonder?"

And again his thought came after his words. Had it been otherwise, he
would not have asked this question, which at that very moment oppressed
his heart with its insufferable horror. Uneasiness seized all present,
and with a feeling of heavy weariness they awaited Lazarus' words, but
he was silent, sternly and coldly, and his eyes were lowered. And as if
for the first time, they noticed the frightful blueness of his face and
his repulsive obesity. On the table, as though forgotten by Lazarus,
rested his bluish-purple wrist, and to this all eyes turned, as if it
were from it that the awaited answer was to come. The musicians were
still playing, but now the silence reached them too, and even as water
extinguishes scattered embers, so were their merry tunes extinguished in
the silence. The pipe grew silent; the voices of the sonorous tympanum
and the murmuring harp died away; and as if the strings had burst, the
cithara answered with a tremulous, broken note. Silence.

"Thou dost not wish to say?" repeated the guest, unable to check his
chattering tongue. But the stillness remained unbroken, and the
bluish-purple hand rested motionless. And then he stirred slightly and
everyone felt relieved. He lifted up his eyes, and lo! straightway
embracing everything in one heavy glance, fraught with weariness and
horror, he looked at them,--Lazarus who had arisen from the dead.

It was the third day since Lazarus had left the grave. Ever since then
many had experienced the pernicious power of his eye, but neither those
who were crushed by it forever, nor those who found the strength to
resist in it the primordial sources of life,--which is as mysterious as
death,--never could they explain the horror which lay motionless in the
depth of his black pupils. Lazarus looked calmly and simply with no
desire to conceal anything, but also with no intention to say anything;
he looked coldly, as he who is infinitely indifferent to those alive.
Many carefree people came close to him without noticing him, and only
later did they learn with astonishment and fear who that calm stout man
was, that walked slowly by, almost touching them with his gorgeous and
dazzling garments. The sun did not cease shining, when he was looking,
nor did the fountain hush its murmur, and the sky overhead remained
cloudless and blue. But the man under the spell of his enigmatical look
heard no more the fountain and saw not the sky overhead. Sometimes, he
wept bitterly, sometimes he tore his hair and in frenzy called for help;
but more often it came to pass that apathetically and quietly he began
to die, and so he languished many years, before everybody's very eyes,
wasted away, colorless, flabby, dull, like a tree, silently drying up in
a stony soil. And of those who gazed at him, the ones who wept madly,
sometimes felt again the stir of life; the others never.

"So thou dost not wish to tell us what thou hast seen yonder?" repeated
the man. But now his voice was impassive and dull, and deadly gray
weariness showed in Lazarus' eyes. And deadly gray weariness covered
like dust all the faces, and with dull amazement the guests stared at
each other and did not understand wherefore they had gathered here and
sat at the rich table. The talk ceased. They thought it was time to go
home, but could not overcome the flaccid lazy weariness which glued
their muscles, and they kept on sitting there, yet apart and torn away
from each other, like pale fires scattered over a dark field.

But the musicians were paid to play and again they took their
instruments and again tunes full of studied mirth and studied sorrow
began to flow and to rise. They unfolded the customary melody but the
guests hearkened in dull amazement. Already they knew not wherefore is
it necessary, and why is it well, that people should pluck strings,
inflate their cheeks, blow in thin pipes, and produce a bizarre,
many-voiced noise.

"What bad music," said someone.

The musicians took offense and left. Following them, the guests left one
after another, for night was already come. And when placid darkness
encircled them and they began to breathe with more ease, suddenly
Lazarus' image loomed up before each one in formidable radiance: the
blue face of a corpse, grave-clothes gorgeous and resplendent, a cold
look, in the depths of which lay motionless an unknown horror. As though
petrified, they were standing far apart, and darkness enveloped them,
but in the darkness blazed brighter and brighter the supernatural vision
of him who for three days had been under the enigmatical sway of death.
For three days had he been dead: thrice had the sun risen and set, but
he had been dead; children had played, streams murmured over pebbles,
the wayfarer had lifted up hot dust in the highroad,--but he had been
dead. And now he is again among them,--touches them,--looks at
them,--looks at them! and through the black discs of his pupils, as
through darkened glass, stares the unknowable Yonder.


III

No one was taking care of Lazarus, for no friends no relatives were left
to him, and the great desert which encircled the holy city, came near
the very threshold of his dwelling. And the desert entered his house,
and stretched on his couch, like a wife and extinguished the fires. No
one was taking care of Lazarus. One after the other, his sisters--Mary
and Martha--forsook him. For a long while Martha was loath to abandon
him, for she knew not who would feed him and pity him, she wept and
prayed. But one night, when the wind was roaming in the desert and with
a hissing sound the cypresses were bending over the roof, she dressed
noiselessly and secretly left the house. Lazarus probably heard the door
slam; it banged against the side-post under the gusts of the desert
wind, but he did not rise to go out and to look at her that was
abandoning him. All the night long the cypresses hissed over his head
and plaintively thumped the door, letting in the cold, greedy desert.

Like a leper he was shunned by everyone, and it was proposed to tie a
bell to his neck, as is done with lepers, to warn people against sudden
meetings. But someone remarked, growing frightfully pale, that it would
be too horrible if by night the moaning of Lazarus' bell were suddenly
heard under the windows,--and so the project was abandoned.

And since he did not take care of himself, he would probably have
starved to death, had not the neighbors brought him food in fear of
something that they sensed but vaguely. The food was brought to him by
children; they were not afraid of Lazarus, nor did they mock him with
naive cruelty, as children are wont to do with the wretched and
miserable. They were indifferent to him, and Lazarus answered them with
the same coldness; he had no desire to caress the black little curls,
and to look into their innocent shining eyes. Given to Time and to the
Desert, his house was crumbling down, and long since had his famishing,
lowing goats wandered away to the neighboring pastures. And his bridal
garments became threadbare. Ever since that happy day, when the
musicians played, he had worn them unaware of the difference of the new
and the worn. The bright colors grew dull and faded; vicious dogs and
the sharp thorn of the Desert turned the tender fabric into rags.

By day, when the merciless sun slew all things alive, and even scorpions
sought shelter under stones and writhed there in a mad desire to sting,
he sat motionless under the sunrays, his blue face and the uncouth,
bushy beard lifted up, bathing in the fiery flood.

When people still talked to him, he was once asked:

"Poor Lazarus, does it please thee to sit thus and to stare at the
sun?"

And he had answered:

"Yes, it does."

So strong, it seemed, was the cold of his three days' grave, so deep the
darkness, that there was no heat on earth to warm Lazarus, nor a
splendor that could brighten the darkness of his eyes. That is what came
to the mind of those who spoke to Lazarus, and with a sigh they left
him.

And when the scarlet, flattened globe would lower, Lazarus would set out
for the desert and walk straight toward the sun, as though striving to
reach it. He always walked straight toward the sun and those who tried
to follow him and to spy upon what he was doing at night in the desert,
retained in their memory the black silhouette of a tall stout man
against the red background of an enormous flattened disc. Night pursued
them with her horrors, and so they did not learn of Lazarus' doings in
the desert, but the vision of the black on red was forever branded on
their brain. Just as a beast with a splinter in its eye furiously rubs
its muzzle with its paws, so they too foolishly rubbed their eyes, but
what Lazarus had given was indelible, and Death alone could efface it.

But there were people who lived far away, who never saw Lazarus and knew
of him only by report. With daring curiosity, which is stronger than
fear and feeds upon it, with hidden mockery, they would come to Lazarus
who was sitting in the sun and enter into conversation with him. By
this time Lazarus' appearance had changed for the better and was not so
terrible. The first minute they snapped their fingers and thought of how
stupid the inhabitants of the holy city were; but when the short talk
was over and they started homeward, their looks were such that the
inhabitants of the holy city recognized them at once and said:

"Look, there is one more fool on whom Lazarus has set his eye,"--and
they shook their heads regretfully, and lifted up their arms.

There came brave, intrepid warriors, with tinkling weapons; happy youths
came with laughter and song; busy tradesmen, jingling their money, ran
in for a moment, and haughty priests leaned their crosiers against
Lazarus' door, and they were all strangely changed, as they came back.
The same terrible shadow swooped down upon their souls and gave a new
appearance to the old familiar world.

Those who still had the desire to speak, expressed their feelings thus:

"All things tangible and visible grew hollow, light, and
transparent,--similar to lightsome shadows in the darkness of night;

"for, that great darkness, which holds the whole cosmos, was dispersed
neither by the sun or by the moon and the stars, but like an immense
black shroud enveloped the earth and, like a mother, embraced it;

"it penetrated all the bodies, iron and stone,--and the particles of
the bodies, having lost their ties, grew lonely; and it penetrated into
the depth of the particles, and the particles of particles became
lonely;

"for that great void, which encircles the cosmos, was not filled by
things visible: neither by the sun, nor by the moon and the stars, but
reigned unrestrained, penetrating everywhere, severing body from body,
particle from particle;

"in the void hollow trees spread hollow roots threatening a fantastic
fall; temples, palaces, and horses loomed up and they were hollow; and
in the void men moved about restlessly but they were light and hollow
like shadows;

"for, Time was no more, and the beginning of all things came near their
end: the building was still being built, and builders were still
hammering away, and its ruins were already seen and the void in its
place; the man was still being born, but already funeral candles were
burning at his head, and now they were extinguished, and there was the
void in place of the man and of the funeral candles.

"and wrapped by void and darkness the man in despair trembled in the
face of the Horror of the Infinite."

Thus spake the men who had still a desire to speak. But, surely, much
more could have told those who wished not to speak, and died in
silence.


IV

At that time there lived in Rome a renowned sculptor. In clay, marble,
and bronze he wrought bodies of gods and men, and such was their beauty,
that people called them immortal. But he himself was discontented and
asserted that there was something even more beautiful, that he could not
embody either in marble or in bronze. "I have not yet gathered the
glimmers of the moon, nor have I my fill of sunshine," he was wont to
say, "and there is no soul in my marble, no life in my beautiful
bronze." And when on moonlit nights he slowly walked along the road,
crossing the black shadows of cypresses, his white tunic glittering in
the moonshine, those who met him would laugh in a friendly way and say:

"Art thou going to gather moonshine, Aurelius? Why then didst thou not
fetch baskets?"

And he would answer, laughing and pointing to his eyes:

"Here are the baskets wherein I gather the sheen of the moon and the
glimmer of the sun."

And so it was: the moon glimmered in his eyes and the sun sparkled
therein. But he could not translate them into marble and therein lay the
serene tragedy of his life.

He was descended from an ancient patrician race, had a good wife and
children, and suffered from no want.

When the obscure rumor about Lazarus reached him, he consulted his wife
and friends and undertook the far journey to Judea to see him who had
miraculously risen from the dead. He was somewhat weary in those days
and he hoped that the road would sharpen his blunted senses. What was
said of Lazarus did not frighten him: he had pondered much over Death,
did not like it, but he disliked also those who confused it with life.

    "In this life,--life and beauty;
    beyond,--Death, the enigmatical"--

thought he, and there is no better thing for a man to do than to delight
in life and in the beauty of all things living. He had even a
vainglorious desire to convince Lazarus of the truth of his own view and
restore his soul to life, as his body had been restored. This seemed so
much easier because the rumors, shy and strange, did not render the
whole truth about Lazarus and but vaguely warned against something
frightful.

Lazarus had just risen from the stone in order to follow the sun which
was setting in the desert, when a rich Roman attended by an armed slave,
approached him and addressed him in a sonorous tone of voice:

"Lazarus!"

And Lazarus beheld a superb face, lit with glory, and arrayed in fine
clothes, and precious stones sparkling in the sun. The red light lent to
the Roman's face and head the appearance of gleaming bronze--that also
Lazarus noticed. He resumed obediently his place and lowered his weary
eyes.

"Yes, thou art ugly, my poor Lazarus,"--quietly said the Roman, playing
with his golden chain; "thou art even horrible, my poor friend; and
Death was not lazy that day when thou didst fall so heedlessly into his
hands. But thou art stout, and, as the great Caesar used to say, fat
people are not ill-tempered; to tell the truth, I don't understand why
men fear thee. Permit me to spend the night in thy house; the hour is
late, and I have no shelter."

Never had anyone asked Lazarus' hospitality.

"I have no bed," said he.

"I am somewhat of a soldier and I can sleep sitting," the Roman
answered. "We shall build a fire."

"I have no fire."

"Then we shall have our talk in the darkness, like two friends. I think
thou wilt find a bottle of wine."

"I have no wine."

The Roman laughed.

"Now I see why thou art so somber and dislikest thy second life. No
wine! Why, then we shall do without it: there are words that make the
head go round better than the Falernian."

By a sign he dismissed the slave, and they remained all alone. And again
the sculptor started speaking, but it was as if, together with the
setting sun, life had left his words; and they grew pale and hollow, as
if they staggered on unsteady feet, as if they slipped and fell down,
drunk with the heavy lees of weariness and despair. And black chasms
grew up between the words--like far-off hints of the great void and the
great darkness.

"Now I am thy guest, and thou wilt not be unkind to me, Lazarus!"--said
he. "Hospitality is the duty even of those who for three days were dead.
Three days, I was told, thou didst rest in the grave. There it must be
cold ... and that is whence comes thy ill habit of going without fire
and wine. As to me, I like fire; it grows dark here so rapidly.... The
lines of thy eyebrows and forehead are quite, quite interesting: they
are like ruins of strange palaces, buried in ashes after an earthquake.
But why dost thou wear such ugly and queer garments? I have seen
bridegrooms in thy country, and they wear such clothes--are they not
funny--and terrible.... But art thou a bridegroom?"

The sun had already disappeared, a monstrous black shadow came running
from the east--it was as if gigantic bare feet began rumbling on the
sand, and the wind sent a cold wave along the backbone.

"In the darkness thou seemest still larger, Lazarus, as if thou hast
grown stouter in these moments. Dost thou feed on darkness, Lazarus? I
would fain have a little fire--at least a little fire, a little fire. I
feel somewhat chilly, your nights are so barbarously cold.... Were it
not so dark, I should say that thou wert looking at me, Lazarus. Yes, it
seems to me, thou art looking.... Why, thou art looking at me, I feel
it,--but there thou art smiling."

Night came, and filled the air with heavy blackness.

"How well it will be, when the sun will rise to-morrow anew.... I am a
great sculptor, thou knowest; that is how my friends call me. I create.
Yes, that is the word ... but I need daylight. I give life to the cold
marble, I melt sonorous bronze in fire, in bright hot fire.... Why didst
thou touch me with thy hand?"

"Come"--said Lazarus--"Thou art my guest."

And they went to the house. And a long night enveloped the earth.

The slave, seeing that his master did not come, went to seek him, when
the sun was already high in the sky. And he beheld his master side by
side with Lazarus: in profound silence were they sitting right under the
dazzling and scorching sunrays and looking upward. The slave began to
weep and cried out:

"My master, what has befallen thee, master?"

The very same day the sculptor left for Rome. On the way Aurelius was
pensive and taciturn, staring attentively at everything--the men, the
ship, the sea, as though trying to retain something. On the high sea a
storm burst upon them, and all through it Aurelius stayed on the deck
and eagerly scanned the seas looming near and sinking with a thud.

At home his friends were frightened at the change which had taken place
in Aurelius, but he calmed them, saying meaningly:

"I have found it."

And without changing the dusty clothes he wore on his journey, he fell
to work, and the marble obediently resounded under his sonorous hammer.
Long and eagerly worked he, admitting no one, until one morning he
announced that the work was ready and ordered his friends to be
summoned, severe critics and connoisseurs of art. And to meet them he
put on bright and gorgeous garments, that glittered with yellow
gold--and--scarlet byssus.

"Here is my work," said he thoughtfully.

His friends glanced and a shadow of profound sorrow covered their faces.
It was something monstrous, deprived of all the lines and shapes
familiar to the eye, but not without a hint at some new, strange image.

On a thin, crooked twig, or rather on an ugly likeness of a twig rested
askew a blind, ugly, shapeless, outspread mass of something utterly and
inconceivably distorted, a mad leap of wild and bizarre fragments, all
feebly and vainly striving to part from one another. And, as if by
chance, beneath one of the wildly-rent salients a butterfly was chiseled
with divine skill, all airy loveliness, delicacy, and beauty, with
transparent wings, which seemed to tremble with an impotent desire to
take flight.

"Wherefore this wonderful butterfly, Aurelius?" said somebody
falteringly.

"I know not"--was the sculptor's answer.

But it was necessary to tell the truth, and one of his friends who loved
him best said firmly:

"This is ugly, my poor friend. It must be destroyed. Give me the
hammer."

And with two strokes he broke the monstrous man into pieces, leaving
only the infinitely delicate butterfly untouched.

From that time on Aurelius created nothing. With profound indifference
he looked at marble and bronze, and on his former divine works, where
everlasting beauty rested. With the purpose of arousing his former
fervent passion for work and, awakening his deadened soul, his friends
took him to see other artists' beautiful works,--but he remained
indifferent as before, and the smile did not warm up his tightened lips.
And only after listening to lengthy talks about beauty, he would retort
wearily and indolently:

"But all this is a lie."

And by the day, when the sun was shining, he went into his magnificent,
skilfully built garden and having found a place without shadow, he
exposed his bare head to the glare and heat. Red and white butterflies
fluttered around; from the crooked lips of a drunken satyr, water
streamed down with a splash into a marble cistern, but he sat
motionless and silent,--like a pallid reflection of him who, in the
far-off distance, at the very gates of the stony desert, sat under the
fiery sun.


V

And now it came to pass that the great, deified Augustus himself
summoned Lazarus. The imperial messengers dressed him gorgeously, in
solemn nuptial clothes, as if Time had legalized them, and he was to
remain until his very death the bridegroom of an unknown bride. It was
as though an old, rotting coffin had been gilt and furnished with new,
gay tassels. And men, all in trim and bright attire, rode after him, as
if in bridal procession indeed, and those foremost trumpeted loudly,
bidding people to clear the way for the emperor's messengers. But
Lazarus' way was deserted: his native land cursed the hateful name of
him who had miraculously risen from the dead, and people scattered at
the very news of his appalling approach. The solitary voice of the brass
trumpets sounded in the motionless air, and the wilderness alone
responded with its languid echo.

Then Lazarus went by sea. And his was the most magnificently arrayed and
the most mournful ship that ever mirrored itself in the azure waves of
the Mediterranean Sea. Many were the travelers aboard, but like a tomb
was the ship, all silence and stillness, and the despairing water sobbed
at the steep, proudly curved prow. All alone sat Lazarus exposing his
head to the blaze of the sun, silently listening to the murmur and
splash of the wavelets, and afar seamen and messengers were sitting, a
vague group of weary shadows. Had the thunder burst and the wind
attacked the red sails, the ships would probably have perished, for none
of those aboard had either the will or the strength to struggle for
life. With a supreme effort some mariners would reach the board and
eagerly scan the blue, transparent deep, hoping to see a naiad's pink
shoulder flash in the hollow of an azure wave, or a drunken gay centaur
dash along and in frenzy splash the wave with his hoof. But the sea was
like a wilderness, and the deep was dumb and deserted.

With utter indifference did Lazarus set his feet on the street of the
eternal city. As though all her wealth, all the magnificence of her
palaces built by giants, all the resplendence, beauty, and music of her
refined life were but the echo of the wind in the wilderness, the
reflection of the desert quicksand. Chariots were dashing, and along the
streets were moving crowds of strong, fair, proud builders of the
eternal city and haughty participants in her life; a song sounded;
fountains and women laughed a pearly laughter; drunken philosophers
harangued, and the sober listened to them with a smile; hoofs struck the
stone pavements. And surrounded by cheerful noise, a stout, heavy man
was moving, a cold spot of silence and despair, and on his way he sowed
disgust, anger, and vague, gnawing weariness. Who dares to be sad in
Rome, wondered indignantly the citizens, and frowned. In two days the
entire city already knew all about him who had miraculously risen from
the dead, and shunned him shyly.

But some daring people there were, who wanted to test their strength,
and Lazarus obeyed their imprudent summons. Kept busy by state affairs,
the emperor constantly delayed the reception, and seven days did he who
had risen from the dead go about visiting others.

And Lazarus came to a cheerful Epicurean, and the host met him with
laughter on his lips:

"Drink, Lazarus, drink!"--shouted he. "Would not Augustus laugh to see
thee drunk!"

And half-naked drunken women laughed, and rose petals fell on Lazarus'
blue hands. But then the Epicurean looked into Lazarus' eyes, and his
gaiety ended forever. Drunkard remained he for the rest of his life;
never did he drink, yet forever was he drunk. But instead of the gay
reverie which wine brings with it, frightful dreams began to haunt him,
the sole food of his stricken spirit. Day and night he lived in the
poisonous vapors of his nightmares, and death itself was not more
frightful than her raving, monstrous forerunners.

And Lazarus came to a youth and his beloved, who loved each other and
were most beautiful in their passions. Proudly and strongly embracing
his love, the youth said with serene regret:

"Look at us, Lazarus, and share our joy. Is there anything stronger
than love?"

And Lazarus looked. And for the rest of their life they kept on loving
each other, but their passion grew gloomy and joyless, like those
funeral cypresses whose roots feed on the decay of the graves and whose
black summits in a still evening hour seek in vain to reach the sky.
Thrown by the unknown forces of life into each other's embraces, they
mingled tears with kisses, voluptuous pleasures with pain, and they felt
themselves doubly slaves, obedient slaves to life, and patient servants
of the silent Nothingness. Ever united, ever severed, they blazed like
sparks and like sparks lost themselves in the boundless Dark.

And Lazarus came to a haughty sage, and the sage said to him:

"I know all the horrors thou canst reveal to me. Is there anything thou
canst frighten me with?"

But before long the sage felt that the knowledge of horror was far from
being the horror itself, and that the vision of Death, was not Death.
And he felt that wisdom and folly are equal before the face of Infinity,
for Infinity knows them not. And it vanished, the dividing-line between
knowledge and ignorance, truth and falsehood, top and bottom, and the
shapeless thought hung suspended in the void. Then the sage clutched his
gray head and cried out frantically:

"I cannot think! I cannot think!"

Thus under the indifferent glance for him, who miraculously had risen
from the dead, perished everything that asserts life, its significance
and joys. And it was suggested that it was dangerous to let him see the
emperor, that it was better to kill him and, having buried him secretly,
to tell the emperor that he had disappeared no one knew whither. Already
swords were being whetted and youths devoted to the public welfare
prepared for the murder, when Augustus ordered Lazarus to be brought
before him next morning, thus destroying the cruel plans.

If there was no way of getting rid of Lazarus, at least it was possible
to soften the terrible impression his face produced. With this in view,
skillful painters, barbers, and artists were summoned, and all night
long they were busy over Lazarus' head. They cropped his beard, curled
it, and gave it a tidy, agreeable appearance. By means of paints they
concealed the corpse-like blueness of his hands and face. Repulsive were
the wrinkles of suffering that furrowed his old face, and they were
puttied, painted, and smoothed; then, over the smooth background,
wrinkles of good-tempered laughter and pleasant, carefree mirth were
skillfully painted with fine brushes.

Lazarus submitted indifferently to everything that was done to him. Soon
he was turned into a becomingly stout, venerable old man, into a quiet
and kind grandfather of numerous offspring. It seemed that the smile,
with which only a while ago he was spinning funny yarns, was still
lingering on his lips, and that in the corner of his eye serene
tenderness was hiding, the companion of old age. But people did not dare
change his nuptial garments, and they could not change his eyes, two
dark and frightful glasses through which looked at men, the unknowable
Yonder.


VI

Lazarus was not moved by the magnificence of the imperial palace. It was
as though he saw no difference between the crumbling house, closely
pressed by the desert, and the stone palace, solid and fair, and
indifferently he passed into it. And the hard marble of the floors under
his feet grew similar to the quicksand of the desert, and the multitude
of richly dressed and haughty men became like void air under his glance.
No one looked into his face, as Lazarus passed by, fearing to fall under
the appalling influence of his eyes; but when the sound of his heavy
footsteps had sufficiently died down, the courtiers raised their heads
and with fearful curiosity examined the figure of a stout, tall,
slightly bent old man, who was slowly penetrating into the very heart of
the imperial palace. Were Death itself passing, it would be faced with
no greater fear: for until then the dead alone knew Death, and those
alive knew Life only--and there was no bridge between them. But this
extraordinary man, although alive, knew Death, and enigmatical,
appalling, was his cursed knowledge. "Woe," people thought, "he will
take the life of our great, deified Augustus," and they sent curses
after Lazarus, who meanwhile kept on advancing into the interior of the
palace.

Already did the emperor know who Lazarus was, and prepared to meet him.
But the monarch was a brave man, and felt his own tremendous,
unconquerable power, and in his fatal duel with him who had miraculously
risen from the dead he wanted not to invoke human help. And so he met
Lazarus face to face:

"Lift not thine eyes upon me, Lazarus," he ordered. "I heard thy face is
like that of Medusa and turns into stone whomsoever thou lookest at.
Now, I wish to see thee and to have a talk with thee, before I turn into
stone,"--added he in a tone of kingly jesting, not devoid of fear.

Coming close to him, he carefully examined Lazarus' face and his strange
festal garments. And although he had a keen eye, he was deceived by his
appearance.

"So. Thou dost not appear terrible, my venerable old man. But the worse
for us, if horror assumes such a respectable and pleasant air. Now let
us have a talk."

Augustus sat, and questioning Lazarus with his eye as much as with
words, started the conversation:

"Why didst thou not greet me as thou enteredst?"

Lazarus answered indifferent:

"I knew not it was necessary."

"Art thou a Christian?"

"No."

Augustus approvingly shook his head.

"That is good. I do not like Christians. They shake the tree of life
before it is covered with fruit, and disperse its odorous bloom to the
winds. But who art thou?"

With a visible effort Lazarus answered:

"I was dead."

"I had heard that. But who art thou now?"

Lazarus was silent, but at last repeated in a tone of weary apathy:

"I was dead."

"Listen to me, stranger," said the emperor, distinctly and severely
giving utterance to the thought that had come to him at the beginning,
"my realm is the realm of Life, my people are of the living, not of the
dead. Thou art here one too many. I know not who thou art and what thou
sawest there; but, if thou liest, I hate thy lies, and if thou tellst
the truth, I hate thy truth. In my bosom I feel the throb of life; I
feel strength in my arm, and my proud thoughts, like eagles, pierce the
space. And yonder in the shelter of my rule, under the protection of
laws created by me, people live and toil and rejoice. Dost thou hear the
battle-cry, the challenge men throw into the face of the future?"

Augustus, as in prayer, stretched forth his arms and exclaimed
solemnly:

"Be blessed, O great and divine Life!"

Lazarus was silent, and with growing sternness the emperor went on:

"Thou art not wanted here, miserable remnant, snatched from under
Death's teeth, thou inspirest weariness and disgust with life; like a
caterpillar in the fields, thou gloatest on the rich ear of joy and
belchest out the drivel of despair and sorrow. Thy truth is like a rusty
sword in the hands of a nightly murderer,--and as a murderer thou shalt
be executed. But before that, let me look into thine eyes. Perchance,
only cowards are afraid of them, but in the brave they awake the thirst
for strife and victory; then thou shalt be rewarded, not executed....
Now, look at me, Lazarus."

At first it appeared to the deified Augustus that a friend was looking
at him,--so soft, so tenderly fascinating was Lazarus' glance. It
promised not horror, but sweet rest and the Infinite seemed to him a
tender mistress, a compassionate sister, a mother. But stronger and
stronger grew its embraces, and already the mouth, greedy of hissing
kisses, interfered with the monarch's breathing, and already to the
surface of the soft tissues of the body came the iron of the bones and
tightened its merciless circle,--and unknown fangs, blunt and cold,
touched his heart and sank into it with slow indolence.

"It pains," said the deified Augustus, growing pale. "But look at me,
Lazarus, look."

It was as though some heavy gates, ever closed, were slowly moving
apart, and through the growing interstice the appalling horror of the
Infinite poured in slowly and steadily. Like two shadows there entered
the shoreless void and the unfathomable darkness; they extinguished the
sun, ravished the earth from under the feet, and the roof from over the
head. No more did the frozen heart ache.

"Look, look, Lazarus," ordered Augustus tottering.

Time stood still, and the beginning of each thing grew frightfully near
to its end. Augustus' throne just erected, crumbled down, and the void
was already in the place of the throne and of Augustus. Noiselessly did
Rome crumble down, and a new city stood on its site and it too was
swallowed by the void. Like fantastic giants, cities, states, and
countries fell down and vanished in the void darkness--and with
uttermost indifference did the insatiable black womb of the Infinite
swallow them.

"Halt!"--ordered the emperor.

In his voice sounded already a note of indifference, his hands dropped
in languor, and in the vain struggle with the onrushing darkness his
fiery eyes now blazed up, and now went out.

"My life thou hast taken from me, Lazarus,"--said he in a spiritless,
feeble voice.

And these words of hopelessness saved him. He remembered his people,
whose shield he was destined to be, and keen salutary pain pierced his
deadened heart. "They are doomed to death," he thought wearily. "Serene
shadows in the darkness of the Infinite," thought he, and horror grew
upon him. "Frail vessels with living seething blood with a heart that
knows sorrow and also great joy," said he in his heart, and tenderness
pervaded it.

Thus pondering and oscillating between the poles of Life and Death, he
slowly came back to life, to find in its suffering and in its joys a
shield against the darkness of the void and the horror of the Infinite.

"No, thou hast not murdered me, Lazarus," said he firmly, "but I will
take thy life. Be gone."

That evening the deified Augustus partook of his meats and drinks with
particular joy. Now and then his lifted hand remained suspended in the
air, and a dull glimmer replaced the bright sheen of his fiery eye. It
was the cold wave of Horror that surged at his feet. Defeated, but not
undone, ever awaiting its hour, that Horror stood at the emperor's
bedside, like a black shadow all through his life; it swayed his nights,
but yielded the days to the sorrows and joys of life.

The following day, the hangman with a hot iron burned out Lazarus' eyes.
Then he was sent home. The deified Augustus dared not kill him.

       *       *       *       *       *

Lazarus returned to the desert, and the wilderness met him with hissing
gusts of wind and the heat of the blazing sun. Again he was sitting on a
stone, his rough, bushy beard lifted up; and the two black holes in
place of his eyes looked at the sky with an expression of dull terror.
Afar-off the holy city stirred noisily and restlessly, but around him
everything was deserted and dumb. No one approached the place where
lived he who had miraculously risen from the dead, and long since his
neighbors had forsaken their houses. Driven by the hot iron into the
depth of his skull, his cursed knowledge hid there in an ambush. As
though leaping out from an ambush it plunged its thousand invisible eyes
into the man,--and no one dared look at Lazarus.

And in the evening, when the sun, reddening and growing wider, would
come nearer and nearer the western horizon, the blind Lazarus would
slowly follow it. He would stumble against stones and fall, stout and
weak as he was; would rise heavily to his feet and walk on again; and on
the red screen of the sunset his black body and outspread hands would
form a monstrous likeness of a cross.

And it came to pass that once he went out and did not come back. Thus
seemingly ended the second life of him who for three days had been under
the enigmatical sway of death, and rose miraculously from the dead.



The Beast with Five Fingers

BY W.F. HARVEY

     From _The New Decameron_, by Various Hands. Copyright, 1919, by
     Robert M. McBride and Company. By permission of the publishers.


When I was a little boy I once went with my father to call on Adrian
Borlsover. I played on the floor with a black spaniel while my father
appealed for a subscription. Just before we left my father said, "Mr.
Borlsover, may my son here shake hands with you? It will be a thing to
look back upon with pride when he grows to be a man."

I came up to the bed on which the old man was lying and put my hand in
his, awed by the still beauty of his face. He spoke to me kindly, and
hoped that I should always try to please my father. Then he placed his
right hand on my head and asked for a blessing to rest upon me. "Amen!"
said my father, and I followed him out of the room, feeling as if I
wanted to cry. But my father was in excellent spirits.

"That old gentleman, Jim," said he, "is the most wonderful man in the
whole town. For ten years he has been quite blind."

"But I saw his eyes," I said. "They were ever so black and shiny; they
weren't shut up like Nora's puppies. Can't he see at all?"

And so I learnt for the first time that a man might have eyes that
looked dark and beautiful and shining without being able to see.

"Just like Mrs. Tomlinson has big ears," I said, "and can't hear at all
except when Mr. Tomlinson shouts."

"Jim," said my father, "it's not right to talk about a lady's ears.
Remember what Mr. Borlsover said about pleasing me and being a good
boy."

That was the only time I saw Adrian Borlsover. I soon forgot about him
and the hand which he laid in blessing on my head. But for a week I
prayed that those dark tender eyes might see.

"His spaniel may have puppies," I said in my prayers, "and he will never
be able to know how funny they look with their eyes all closed up.
Please let old Mr. Borlsover see."

       *       *       *       *       *

Adrian Borlsover, as my father had said, was a wonderful man. He came of
an eccentric family. Borlsovers' sons, for some reason, always seemed to
marry very ordinary women, which perhaps accounted for the fact that no
Borlsover had been a genius, and only one Borlsover had been mad. But
they were great champions of little causes, generous patrons of odd
sciences, founders of querulous sects, trustworthy guides to the bypath
meadows of erudition.

Adrian was an authority on the fertilization of orchids. He had held at
one time the family living at Borlsover Conyers, until a congenital
weakness of the lungs obliged him to seek a less rigorous climate in the
sunny south coast watering-place where I had seen him. Occasionally he
would relieve one or other of the local clergy. My father described him
as a fine preacher, who gave long and inspiring sermons from what many
men would have considered unprofitable texts. "An excellent proof," he
would add, "of the truth of the doctrine of direct verbal inspiration."

Adrian Borlsover was exceedingly clever with his hands. His penmanship
was exquisite. He illustrated all his scientific papers, made his own
woodcuts, and carved the reredos that is at present the chief feature of
interest in the church at Borlsover Conyers. He had an exceedingly
clever knack in cutting silhouettes for young ladies and paper pigs and
cows for little children, and made more than one complicated wind
instrument of his own devising.

When he was fifty years old Adrian Borlsover lost his sight. In a
wonderfully short time he had adapted himself to the new conditions of
life. He quickly learned to read Braille. So marvelous indeed was his
sense of touch that he was still able to maintain his interest in
botany. The mere passing of his long supple fingers over a flower was
sufficient means for its identification, though occasionally he would
use his lips. I have found several letters of his among my father's
correspondence. In no case was there anything to show that he was
afflicted with blindness and this in spite of the fact that he exercised
undue economy in the spacing of lines. Towards the close of his life the
old man was credited with powers of touch that seemed almost uncanny: it
has been said that he could tell at once the color of a ribbon placed
between his fingers. My father would neither confirm nor deny the story.


I

Adrian Borlsover was a bachelor. His elder brother George had married
late in life, leaving one son, Eustace, who lived in the gloomy Georgian
mansion at Borlsover Conyers, where he could work undisturbed in
collecting material for his great book on heredity.

Like his uncle, he was a remarkable man. The Borlsovers had always been
born naturalists, but Eustace possessed in a special degree the power of
systematizing his knowledge. He had received his university education in
Germany, and then, after post-graduate work in Vienna and Naples, had
traveled for four years in South America and the East, getting together
a huge store of material for a new study into the processes of
variation.

He lived alone at Borlsover Conyers with Saunders his secretary, a man
who bore a somewhat dubious reputation in the district, but whose
powers as a mathematician, combined with his business abilities, were
invaluable to Eustace.

Uncle and nephew saw little of each other. The visits of Eustace were
confined to a week in the summer or autumn: long weeks, that dragged
almost as slowly as the bath-chair in which the old man was drawn along
the sunny sea front. In their way the two men were fond of each other,
though their intimacy would doubtless have been greater had they shared
the same religious views. Adrian held to the old-fashioned evangelical
dogmas of his early manhood; his nephew for many years had been thinking
of embracing Buddhism. Both men possessed, too, the reticence the
Borlsovers had always shown, and which their enemies sometimes called
hypocrisy. With Adrian it was a reticence as to the things he had left
undone; but with Eustace it seemed that the curtain which he was so
careful to leave undrawn hid something more than a half-empty chamber.

       *       *       *       *       *

Two years before his death Adrian Borlsover developed, unknown to
himself, the not uncommon power of automatic writing. Eustace made the
discovery by accident. Adrian was sitting reading in bed, the forefinger
of his left hand tracing the Braille characters, when his nephew noticed
that a pencil the old man held in his right hand was moving slowly along
the opposite page. He left his seat in the window and sat down beside
the bed. The right hand continued to move, and now he could see plainly
that they were letters and words which it was forming.

"Adrian Borlsover," wrote the hand, "Eustace Borlsover, George
Borlsover, Francis Borlsover Sigismund Borlsover, Adrian Borlsover,
Eustace Borlsover, Saville Borlsover. B, for Borlsover. Honesty is the
Best Policy. Beautiful Belinda Borlsover."

"What curious nonsense!" said Eustace to himself.

"King George the Third ascended the throne in 1760," wrote the hand.
"Crowd, a noun of multitude; a collection of individuals--Adrian
Borlsover, Eustace Borlsover."

"It seems to me," said his uncle, closing the book, "that you had much
better make the most of the afternoon sunshine and take your walk now."
"I think perhaps I will," Eustace answered as he picked up the volume.
"I won't go far, and when I come back I can read to you those articles
in _Nature_ about which we were speaking."

He went along the promenade, but stopped at the first shelter, and
seating himself in the corner best protected from the wind, he examined
the book at leisure. Nearly every page was scored with a meaningless
jungle of pencil marks: rows of capital letters, short words, long
words, complete sentences, copy-book tags. The whole thing, in fact, had
the appearance of a copy-book, and on a more careful scrutiny Eustace
thought that there was ample evidence to show that the handwriting at
the beginning of the book, good though it was was not nearly so good as
the handwriting at the end.

He left his uncle at the end of October, with a promise to return early
in December. It seemed to him quite clear that the old man's power of
automatic writing was developing rapidly, and for the first time he
looked forward to a visit that combined duty with interest.

But on his return he was at first disappointed. His uncle, he thought,
looked older. He was listless too, preferring others to read to him and
dictating nearly all his letters. Not until the day before he left had
Eustace an opportunity of observing Adrian Borlsover's new-found
faculty.

The old man, propped up in bed with pillows, had sunk into a light
sleep. His two hands lay on the coverlet, his left hand tightly clasping
his right. Eustace took an empty manuscript book and placed a pencil
within reach of the fingers of the right hand. They snatched at it
eagerly; then dropped the pencil to unloose the left hand from its
restraining grasp.

"Perhaps to prevent interference I had better hold that hand," said
Eustace to himself, as he watched the pencil. Almost immediately it
began to write.

"Blundering Borlsovers, unnecessarily unnatural, extraordinarily
eccentric, culpably curious."

"Who are you?" asked Eustace, in a low voice.

"Never you mind," wrote the hand of Adrian.

"Is it my uncle who is writing?"

"Oh, my prophetic soul, mine uncle."

"Is it anyone I know?"

"Silly Eustace, you'll see me very soon."

"When shall I see you?"

"When poor old Adrian's dead."

"Where shall I see you?"

"Where shall you not?"

Instead of speaking his next question, Borlsover wrote it. "What is the
time?"

The fingers dropped the pencil and moved three or four times across the
paper. Then, picking up the pencil, they wrote:

"Ten minutes before four. Put your book away, Eustace. Adrian mustn't
find us working at this sort of thing. He doesn't know what to make of
it, and I won't have poor old Adrian disturbed. _Au revoir_."

Adrian Borlsover awoke with a start.

"I've been dreaming again," he said; "such queer dreams of leaguered
cities and forgotten towns. You were mixed up in this one, Eustace,
though I can't remember how. Eustace, I want to warn you. Don't walk in
doubtful paths. Choose your friends well. Your poor grandfather----"

A fit of coughing put an end to what he was saying, but Eustace saw that
the hand was still writing. He managed unnoticed to draw the book away.
"I'll light the gas," he said, "and ring for tea." On the other side of
the bed curtain he saw the last sentences that had been written.

"It's too late, Adrian," he read. "We're friends already; aren't we,
Eustace Borlsover?"

On the following day Eustace Borlsover left. He thought his uncle looked
ill when he said good-by, and the old man spoke despondently of the
failure his life had been.

"Nonsense, uncle!" said his nephew. "You have got over your difficulties
in a way not one in a hundred thousand would have done. Every one
marvels at your splendid perseverance in teaching your hand to take the
place of your lost sight. To me it's been a revelation of the
possibilities of education."

"Education," said his uncle dreamily, as if the word had started a new
train of thought, "education is good so long as you know to whom and for
what purpose you give it. But with the lower orders of men, the base and
more sordid spirits, I have grave doubts as to its results. Well,
good-by, Eustace, I may not see you again. You are a true Borlsover,
with all the Borlsover faults. Marry, Eustace. Marry some good, sensible
girl. And if by any chance I don't see you again, my will is at my
solicitor's. I've not left you any legacy, because I know you're well
provided for, but I thought you might like to have my books. Oh, and
there's just one other thing. You know, before the end people often lose
control over themselves and make absurd requests. Don't pay any
attention to them, Eustace. Good-by!" and he held out his hand. Eustace
took it. It remained in his a fraction of a second longer than he had
expected, and gripped him with a virility that was surprising. There
was, too, in its touch a subtle sense of intimacy.

"Why, uncle!" he said, "I shall see you alive and well for many long
years to come."

Two months later Adrian Borlsover died.


II

Eustace Borlsover was in Naples at the time. He read the obituary notice
in the _Morning Post_ on the day announced for the funeral.

"Poor old fellow!" he said. "I wonder where I shall find room for all
his books."

The question occurred to him again with greater force when three days
later he found himself standing in the library at Borlsover Conyers, a
huge room built for use, and not for beauty, in the year of Waterloo by
a Borlsover who was an ardent admirer of the great Napoleon. It was
arranged on the plan of many college libraries, with tall, projecting
bookcases forming deep recesses of dusty silence, fit graves for the old
hates of forgotten controversy, the dead passions of forgotten lives. At
the end of the room, behind the bust of some unknown eighteenth-century
divine, an ugly iron corkscrew stair led to a shelf-lined gallery.
Nearly every shelf was full.

"I must talk to Saunders about it," said Eustace. "I suppose that it
will be necessary to have the billiard-room fitted up with book cases."

The two men met for the first time after many weeks in the dining-room
that evening.

"Hullo!" said Eustace, standing before the fire with his hands in his
pockets. "How goes the world, Saunders? Why these dress togs?" He
himself was wearing an old shooting-jacket. He did not believe in
mourning, as he had told his uncle on his last visit; and though he
usually went in for quiet-colored ties, he wore this evening one of an
ugly red, in order to shock Morton the butler, and to make them thrash
out the whole question of mourning for themselves in the servants' hall.
Eustace was a true Borlsover. "The world," said Saunders, "goes the same
as usual, confoundedly slow. The dress togs are accounted for by an
invitation from Captain Lockwood to bridge."

"How are you getting there?"

"I've told your coachman to drive me in your carriage. Any objection?"

"Oh, dear me, no! We've had all things in common for far too many years
for me to raise objections at this hour of the day."

"You'll find your correspondence in the library," went on Saunders.
"Most of it I've seen to. There are a few private letters I haven't
opened. There's also a box with a rat, or something, inside it that
came by the evening post. Very likely it's the six-toed albino. I didn't
look, because I didn't want to mess up my things but I should gather
from the way it's jumping about that it's pretty hungry."

"Oh, I'll see to it," said Eustace, "while you and the Captain earn an
honest penny."

Dinner over and Saunders gone, Eustace went into the library. Though the
fire had been lit the room was by no means cheerful.

"We'll have all the lights on at any rate," he said, as he turned the
switches. "And, Morton," he added, when the butler brought the coffee,
"get me a screwdriver or something to undo this box. Whatever the animal
is, he's kicking up the deuce of a row. What is it? Why are you
dawdling?"

"If you please, sir, when the postman brought it he told me that they'd
bored the holes in the lid at the post-office. There were no breathin'
holes in the lid, sir, and they didn't want the animal to die. That is
all, sir."

"It's culpably careless of the man, whoever he was," said Eustace, as he
removed the screws, "packing an animal like this in a wooden box with no
means of getting air. Confound it all! I meant to ask Morton to bring me
a cage to put it in. Now I suppose I shall have to get one myself."

He placed a heavy book on the lid from which the screws had been
removed, and went into the billiard-room. As he came back into the
library with an empty cage in his hand he heard the sound of something
falling, and then of something scuttling along the floor.

"Bother it! The beast's got out. How in the world am I to find it again
in this library!"

To search for it did indeed seem hopeless. He tried to follow the sound
of the scuttling in one of the recesses where the animal seemed to be
running behind the books in the shelves, but it was impossible to locate
it. Eustace resolved to go on quietly reading. Very likely the animal
might gain confidence and show itself. Saunders seemed to have dealt in
his usual methodical manner with most of the correspondence. There were
still the private letters.

What was that? Two sharp clicks and the lights in the hideous candelabra
that hung from the ceiling suddenly went out.

"I wonder if something has gone wrong with the fuse," said Eustace, as
he went to the switches by the door. Then he stopped. There was a noise
at the other end of the room, as if something was crawling up the iron
corkscrew stair. "If it's gone into the gallery," he said, "well and
good." He hastily turned on the lights, crossed the room, and climbed up
the stair. But he could see nothing. His grandfather had placed a little
gate at the top of the stair, so that children could run and romp in the
gallery without fear of accident. This Eustace closed, and having
considerably narrowed the circle of his search, returned to his desk by
the fire.

How gloomy the library was! There was no sense of intimacy about the
room. The few busts that an eighteenth-century Borlsover had brought
back from the grand tour, might have been in keeping in the old library.
Here they seemed out of place. They made the room feel cold, in spite of
the heavy red damask curtains and great gilt cornices.

With a crash two heavy books fell from the gallery to the floor; then,
as Borlsover looked, another and yet another.

"Very well; you'll starve for this, my beauty!" he said. "We'll do some
little experiments on the metabolism of rats deprived of water. Go on!
Chuck them down! I think I've got the upper hand." He turned once again
to his correspondence. The letter was from the family solicitor. It
spoke of his uncle's death and of the valuable collection of books that
had been left to him in the will.

"There was one request," he read, "which certainly came as a surprise to
me. As you know, Mr. Adrian Borlsover had left instructions that his
body was to be buried in as simple a manner as possible at Eastbourne.
He expressed a desire that there should be neither wreaths nor flowers
of any kind, and hoped that his friends and relatives would not consider
it necessary to wear mourning. The day before his death we received a
letter canceling these instructions. He wished his body to be embalmed
(he gave us the address of the man we were to employ--Pennifer, Ludgate
Hill), with orders that his right hand was to be sent to you, stating
that it was at your special request. The other arrangements as to the
funeral remained unaltered."

"Good Lord!" said Eustace; "what in the world was the old boy driving
at? And what in the name of all that's holy is that?"

Someone was in the gallery. Someone had pulled the cord attached to one
of the blinds, and it had rolled up with a snap. Someone must be in the
gallery, for a second blind did the same. Someone must be walking round
the gallery, for one after the other the blinds sprang up, letting in
the moonlight.

"I haven't got to the bottom of this yet," said Eustace, "but I will do
before the night is very much older," and he hurried up the corkscrew
stair. He had just got to the top when the lights went out a second
time, and he heard again the scuttling along the floor. Quickly he stole
on tiptoe in the dim moonshine in the direction of the noise, feeling as
he went for one of the switches. His fingers touched the metal knob at
last. He turned on the electric light.

About ten yards in front of him, crawling along the floor, was a man's
hand. Eustace stared at it in utter astonishment. It was moving quickly,
in the manner of a geometer caterpillar, the fingers humped up one
moment, flattened out the next; the thumb appeared to give a crab-like
motion to the whole. While he was looking, too surprised to stir, the
hand disappeared round the corner. Eustace ran forward. He no longer saw
it, but he could hear it as it squeezed its way behind the books on one
of the shelves. A heavy volume had been displaced. There was a gap in
the row of books where it had got in. In his fear lest it should escape
him again, he seized the first book that came to his hand and plugged it
into the hole. Then, emptying two shelves of their contents, he took the
wooden boards and propped them up in front to make his barrier doubly
sure.

"I wish Saunders was back," he said; "one can't tackle this sort of
thing alone." It was after eleven, and there seemed little likelihood of
Saunders returning before twelve. He did not dare to leave the shelf
unwatched, even to run downstairs to ring the bell. Morton the butler
often used to come round about eleven to see that the windows were
fastened, but he might not come. Eustace was thoroughly unstrung. At
last he heard steps down below.

"Morton!" he shouted; "Morton!"

"Sir?"

"Has Mr. Saunders got back yet?"

"Not yet, sir."

"Well, bring me some brandy, and hurry up about it. I'm up here in the
gallery, you duffer."

"Thanks," said Eustace, as he emptied the glass. "Don't go to bed yet,
Morton. There are a lot of books that have fallen down by accident;
bring them up and put them back in their shelves."

Morton had never seen Borlsover in so talkative a mood as on that night.
"Here," said Eustace, when the books had been put back and dusted, "you
might hold up these boards for me, Morton. That beast in the box got
out, and I've been chasing it all over the place."

"I think I can hear it chawing at the books, sir. They're not valuable,
I hope? I think that's the carriage, sir; I'll go and call Mr.
Saunders."

It seemed to Eustace that he was away for five minutes, but it could
hardly have been more than one when he returned with Saunders. "All
right, Morton, you can go now. I'm up here, Saunders."

"What's all the row?" asked Saunders, as he lounged forward with his
hands in his pockets. The luck had been with him all the evening. He was
completely satisfied, both with himself and with Captain Lockwood's
taste in wines. "What's the matter? You look to me to be in an absolute
blue funk."

"That old devil of an uncle of mine," began Eustace--"oh, I can't
explain it all. It's his hand that's been playing old Harry all the
evening. But I've got it cornered behind these books. You've got to help
me catch it."

"What's up with you, Eustace? What's the game?"

"It's no game, you silly idiot! If you don't believe me take out one of
those books and put your hand in and feel."

"All right," said Saunders; "but wait till I've rolled up my sleeve. The
accumulated dust of centuries, eh?" He took off his coat, knelt down,
and thrust his arm along the shelf.

"There's something there right enough," he said. "It's got a funny
stumpy end to it, whatever it is, and nips like a crab. Ah, no, you
don't!" He pulled his hand out in a flash. "Shove in a book quickly. Now
it can't get out."

"What was it?" asked Eustace.

"It was something that wanted very much to get hold of me. I felt what
seemed like a thumb and forefinger. Give me some brandy."

"How are we to get it out of there?"

"What about a landing net?"

"No good. It would be too smart for us. I tell you, Saunders, it can
cover the ground far faster than I can walk. But I think I see how we
can manage it. The two books at the end of the shelf are big ones that
go right back against the wall. The others are very thin. I'll take out
one at a time, and you slide the rest along until we have it squashed
between the end two."

It certainly seemed to be the best plan. One by one, as they took out
the books, the space behind grew smaller and smaller. There was
something in it that was certainly very much alive. Once they caught
sight of fingers pressing outward for a way of escape. At last they had
it pressed between the two big books.

"There's muscle there, if there isn't flesh and blood," said Saunders,
as he held them together. "It seems to be a hand right enough, too. I
suppose this is a sort of infectious hallucination. I've read about such
cases before."

"Infectious fiddlesticks!" said Eustace, his face white with anger;
"bring the thing downstairs. We'll get it back into the box."

It was not altogether easy, but they were successful at last. "Drive in
the screws," said Eustace, "we won't run any risks. Put the box in this
old desk of mine. There's nothing in it that I want. Here's the key.
Thank goodness, there's nothing wrong with the lock."

"Quite a lively evening," said Saunders. "Now let's hear more about your
uncle."

They sat up together until early morning. Saunders had no desire for
sleep. Eustace was trying to explain and to forget: to conceal from
himself a fear that he had never felt before--the fear of walking alone
down the long corridor to his bedroom.


III

"Whatever it was," said Eustace to Saunders on the following morning, "I
propose that we drop the subject. There's nothing to keep us here for
the next ten days. We'll motor up to the Lakes and get some climbing."

"And see nobody all day, and sit bored to death with each other every
night. Not for me thanks. Why not run up to town? Run's the exact word
in this case, isn't it? We're both in such a blessed funk. Pull yourself
together Eustace, and let's have another look at the hand."

"As you like," said Eustace; "there's the key." They went into the
library and opened the desk. The box was as they had left it on the
previous night.

"What are you waiting for?" asked Eustace.

"I am waiting for you to volunteer to open the lid. However, since you
seem to funk it, allow me. There doesn't seem to be the likelihood of
any rumpus this morning, at all events." He opened the lid and picked
out the hand.

"Cold?" asked Eustace.

"Tepid. A bit below blood-heat by the feel. Soft and supple too. If it's
the embalming, it's a sort of embalming I've never seen before. Is it
your uncle's hand?"

"Oh, yes, it's his all right," said Eustace. "I should know those long
thin fingers anywhere. Put it back in the box, Saunders. Never mind
about the screws. I'll lock the desk, so that there'll be no chance of
its getting out. We'll compromise by motoring up to town for a week. If
we get off soon after lunch we ought to be at Grantham or Stamford by
night."

"Right," said Saunders; "and to-morrow--Oh, well, by to-morrow we shall
have forgotten all about this beastly thing."

If when the morrow came they had not forgotten, it was certainly true
that at the end of the week they were able to tell a very vivid ghost
story at the little supper Eustace gave on Hallow E'en.

"You don't want us to believe that it's true, Mr. Borlsover? How
perfectly awful!"

"I'll take my oath on it, and so would Saunders here; wouldn't you, old
chap?"

"Any number of oaths," said Saunders. "It was a long thin hand, you
know, and it gripped me just like that."

"Don't Mr. Saunders! Don't! How perfectly horrid! Now tell us another
one, do. Only a really creepy one, please!"

       *       *       *       *       *

"Here's a pretty mess!" said Eustace on the following day as he threw a
letter across the table to Saunders. "It's your affair, though. Mrs.
Merrit, if I understand it, gives a month's notice."

"Oh, that's quite absurd on Mrs. Merrit's part," Saunders replied. "She
doesn't know what she's talking about. Let's see what she says."


"DEAR SIR," he read, "this is to let you know that I must give you a
month's notice as from Tuesday the 13th. For a long time I've felt the
place too big for me, but when Jane Parfit, and Emma Laidlaw go off
with scarcely as much as an 'if you please,' after frightening the wits
out of the other girls, so that they can't turn out a room by themselves
or walk alone down the stairs for fear of treading on half-frozen toads
or hearing it run along the passages at night, all I can say is that
it's no place for me. So I must ask you, Mr. Borlsover, sir, to find a
new housekeeper that has no objection to large and lonely houses, which
some people do say, not that I believe them for a minute, my poor mother
always having been a Wesleyan, are haunted.

                                "Yours faithfully,
                                     ELIZABETH MERRIT.


"P.S.--I should be obliged if you would give my respects to Mr.
Saunders. I hope that he won't run no risks with his cold."


"Saunders," said Eustace, "you've always had a wonderful way with you in
dealing with servants. You mustn't let poor old Merrit go."

"Of course she shan't go," said Saunders. "She's probably only angling
for a rise in salary. I'll write to her this morning."

"No; there's nothing like a personal interview. We've had enough of
town. We'll go back to-morrow, and you must work your cold for all it's
worth. Don't forget that it's got on to the chest, and will require
weeks of feeding up and nursing."

"All right. I think I can manage Mrs. Merrit."

But Mrs. Merrit was more obstinate than he had thought. She was very
sorry to hear of Mr. Saunders's cold, and how he lay awake all night in
London coughing; very sorry indeed. She'd change his room for him
gladly, and get the south room aired. And wouldn't he have a basin of
hot bread and milk last thing at night? But she was afraid that she
would have to leave at the end of the month.

"Try her with an increase of salary," was the advice of Eustace.

It was no use. Mrs. Merrit was obdurate, though she knew of a Mrs.
Handyside who had been housekeeper to Lord Gargrave, who might be glad
to come at the salary mentioned.

"What's the matter with the servants, Morton?" asked Eustace that
evening when he brought the coffee into the library. "What's all this
about Mrs. Merrit wanting to leave?"

"If you please, sir, I was going to mention it myself. I have a
confession to make, sir. When I found your note asking me to open that
desk and take out the box with the rat, I broke the lock as you told me,
and was glad to do it, because I could hear the animal in the box making
a great noise, and I thought it wanted food. So I took out the box, sir,
and got a cage, and was going to transfer it, when the animal got away."

"What in the world are you talking about? I never wrote any such note."

"Excuse me, sir, it was the note I picked up here on the floor on the
day you and Mr. Saunders left. I have it in my pocket now."

It certainly seemed to be in Eustace's handwriting. It was written in
pencil, and began somewhat abruptly.

"Get a hammer, Morton," he read, "or some other tool, and break open the
lock in the old desk in the library. Take out the box that is inside.
You need not do anything else. The lid is already open. Eustace
Borlsover."

"And you opened the desk?"

"Yes, sir; and as I was getting the cage ready the animal hopped out."

"What animal?"

"The animal inside the box, sir."

"What did it look like?"

"Well, sir, I couldn't tell you," said Morton nervously; "my back was
turned, and it was halfway down the room when I looked up."

"What was its color?" asked Saunders; "black?"

"Oh, no, sir, a grayish white. It crept along in a very funny way, sir.
I don't think it had a tail."

"What did you do then?"

"I tried to catch it, but it was no use. So I set the rat-traps and kept
the library shut. Then that girl Emma Laidlaw left the door open when
she was cleaning, and I think it must have escaped."

"And you think it was the animal that's been frightening the maids?"

"Well, no, sir, not quite. They said it was--you'll excuse me, sir--a
hand that they saw. Emma trod on it once at the bottom of the stairs.
She thought then it was a half-frozen toad, only white. And then Parfit
was washing up the dishes in the scullery. She wasn't thinking about
anything in particular. It was close on dusk. She took her hands out of
the water and was drying them absent-minded like on the roller towel,
when she found that she was drying someone else's hand as well, only
colder than hers."

"What nonsense!" exclaimed Saunders.

"Exactly, sir; that's what I told her; but we couldn't get her to stop."

"You don't believe all this?" said Eustace, turning suddenly towards the
butler.

"Me, sir? Oh, no, sir! I've not seen anything."

"Nor heard anything?"

"Well, sir, if you must know, the bells do ring at odd times, and
there's nobody there when we go; and when we go round to draw the blinds
of a night, as often as not somebody's been there before us. But as I
says to Mrs. Merrit, a young monkey might do wonderful things, and we
all know that Mr. Borlsover has had some strange animals about the
place."

"Very well, Morton, that will do."

"What do you make of it?" asked Saunders when they were alone. "I mean
of the letter he said you wrote."

"Oh, that's simple enough," said Eustace. "See the paper it's written
on? I stopped using that years ago, but there were a few odd sheets and
envelopes left in the old desk. We never fastened up the lid of the box
before locking it in. The hand got out, found a pencil, wrote this note,
and shoved it through a crack on to the floor where Morton found it.
That's plain as daylight."

"But the hand couldn't write?"

"Couldn't it? You've not seen it do the things I've seen," and he told
Saunders more of what had happened at Eastbourne.

"Well," said Saunders, "in that case we have at least an explanation of
the legacy. It was the hand which wrote unknown to your uncle that
letter to your solicitor, bequeathing itself to you. Your uncle had no
more to do with that request than I. In fact, it would seem that he had
some idea of this automatic writing, and feared it."

"Then if it's not my uncle, what is it?"

"I suppose some people might say that a disembodied spirit had got your
uncle to educate and prepare a little body for it. Now it's got into
that little body and is off on its own."

"Well, what are we to do?"

"We'll keep our eyes open," said Saunders, "and try to catch it. If we
can't do that, we shall have to wait till the bally clockwork runs
down. After all, if it's flesh and blood, it can't live for ever."

For two days nothing happened. Then Saunders saw it sliding down the
banister in the hall. He was taken unawares, and lost a full second
before he started in pursuit, only to find that the thing had escaped
him. Three days later, Eustace, writing alone in the library at night,
saw it sitting on an open book at the other end of the room. The fingers
crept over the page, feeling the print as if it were reading; but before
he had time to get up from his seat, it had taken the alarm and was
pulling itself up the curtains. Eustace watched it grimly as it hung on
to the cornice with three fingers, flicking thumb and forefinger at him
in an expression of scornful derision.

"I know what I'll do," he said. "If I only get it into the open I'll set
the dogs on to it."

He spoke to Saunders of the suggestion.

"It's jolly good idea," he said; "only we won't wait till we find it out
of doors. We'll get the dogs. There are the two terriers and the
under-keeper's Irish mongrel that's on to rats like a flash. Your
spaniel has not got spirit enough for this sort of game." They brought
the dogs into the house, and the keeper's Irish mongrel chewed up the
slippers, and the terriers tripped up Morton as he waited at table; but
all three were welcome. Even false security is better than no security
at all.

For a fortnight nothing happened. Then the hand was caught, not by the
dogs, but by Mrs. Merrit's gray parrot. The bird was in the habit of
periodically removing the pins that kept its seed and water tins in
place, and of escaping through the holes in the side of the cage. When
once at liberty Peter would show no inclination to return, and would
often be about the house for days. Now, after six consecutive weeks of
captivity, Peter had again discovered a new means of unloosing his bolts
and was at large, exploring the tapestried forests of the curtains and
singing songs in praise of liberty from cornice and picture rail.

"It's no use your trying to catch him," said Eustace to Mrs. Merrit, as
she came into the study one afternoon towards dusk with a step-ladder.
"You'd much better leave Peter alone. Starve him into surrender, Mrs.
Merrit, and don't leave bananas and seed about for him to peck at when
he fancies he's hungry. You're far too softhearted."

"Well, sir, I see he's right out of reach now on that picture rail, so
if you wouldn't mind closing the door, sir, when you leave the room,
I'll bring his cage in to-night and put some meat inside it. He's that
fond of meat, though it does make him pull out his feathers to suck the
quills. They _do_ say that if you cook--"

"Never mind, Mrs. Merrit," said Eustace, who was busy writing. "That
will do; I'll keep an eye on the bird."

There was silence in the room, unbroken but for the continuous whisper
of his pen.

"Scratch poor Peter," said the bird. "Scratch poor old Peter!"

"Be quiet, you beastly bird!"

"Poor old Peter! Scratch poor Peter, do."

"I'm more likely to wring your neck if I get hold of you." He looked up
at the picture rail, and there was the hand holding on to a hook with
three fingers, and slowly scratching the head of the parrot with the
fourth. Eustace ran to the bell and pressed it hard; then across to the
window, which he closed with a bang. Frightened by the noise the parrot
shook its wings preparatory to flight, and as it did so the fingers of
the hand got hold of it by the throat. There was a shrill scream from
Peter as he fluttered across the room, wheeling round in circles that
ever descended, borne down under the weight that clung to him. The bird
dropped at last quite suddenly, and Eustace saw fingers and feathers
rolled into an inextricable mass on the floor. The struggle abruptly
ceased as finger and thumb squeezed the neck; the bird's eyes rolled up
to show the whites, and there was a faint, half-choked gurgle. But
before the fingers had time to loose their hold, Eustace had them in his
own.

"Send Mr. Saunders here at once," he said to the maid who came in answer
to the bell. "Tell him I want him immediately."

Then he went with the hand to the fire. There was a ragged gash across
the back where the bird's beak had torn it, but no blood oozed from the
wound. He noticed with disgust that the nails had grown long and
discolored.

"I'll burn the beastly thing," he said. But he could not burn it. He
tried to throw it into the flames, but his own hands, as if restrained
by some old primitive feeling, would not let him. And so Saunders found
him pale and irresolute, with the hand still clasped tightly in his
fingers.

"I've got it at last," he said in a tone of triumph.

"Good; let's have a look at it."

"Not when it's loose. Get me some nails and a hammer and a board of some
sort."

"Can you hold it all right?"

"Yes, the thing's quite limp; tired out with throttling poor old Peter,
I should say."

"And now," said Saunders when he returned with the things, "what are we
going to do?"

"Drive a nail through it first, so that it can't get away; then we can
take our time over examining it."

"Do it yourself," said Saunders. "I don't mind helping you with
guinea-pigs occasionally when there's something to be learned; partly
because I don't fear a guinea-pig's revenge. This thing's different."

"All right, you miserable skunk. I won't forget the way you've stood by
me."

He took up a nail, and before Saunders had realised what he was doing
had driven it through the hand, deep into the board.

"Oh, my aunt," he giggled hysterically, "look at it now," for the hand
was writhing in agonized contortions, squirming and wriggling upon the
nail like a worm upon the hook.

"Well," said Saunders, "you've done it now. I'll leave you to examine
it."

"Don't go, in heaven's name. Cover it up, man, cover it up! Shove a
cloth over it! Here!" and he pulled off the antimacassar from the back
of a chair and wrapped the board in it. "Now get the keys from my pocket
and open the safe. Chuck the other things out. Oh, Lord, it's getting
itself into frightful knots! and open it quick!" He threw the thing in
and banged the door.

"We'll keep it there till it dies," he said. "May I burn in hell if I
ever open the door of that safe again."

       *       *       *       *       *

Mrs. Merrit departed at the end of the month. Her successor certainly
was more successful in the management of the servants. Early in her rule
she declared that she would stand no nonsense, and gossip soon withered
and died. Eustace Borlsover went back to his old way of life. Old habits
crept over and covered his new experience. He was, if anything, less
morose, and showed a greater inclination to take his natural part in
country society.

"I shouldn't be surprised if he marries one of these days," said
Saunders. "Well, I'm in no hurry for such an event. I know Eustace far
too well for the future Mrs. Borlsover to like me. It will be the same
old story again: a long friendship slowly made--marriage--and a long
friendship quickly forgotten."


IV

But Eustace Borlsover did not follow the advice of his uncle and marry.
He was too fond of old slippers and tobacco. The cooking, too, under
Mrs. Handyside's management was excellent, and she seemed, too, to have
a heaven-sent faculty in knowing when to stop dusting.

Little by little the old life resumed its old power. Then came the
burglary. The men, it was said, broke into the house by way of the
conservatory. It was really little more than an attempt, for they only
succeeded in carrying away a few pieces of plate from the pantry. The
safe in the study was certainly found open and empty, but, as Mr.
Borlsover informed the police inspector, he had kept nothing of value in
it during the last six months.

"Then you're lucky in getting off so easily, sir," the man replied. "By
the way they have gone about their business, I should say they were
experienced cracksmen. They must have caught the alarm when they were
just beginning their evening's work."

"Yes," said Eustace, "I suppose I am lucky."

"I've no doubt," said the inspector, "that we shall be able to trace
the men. I've said that they must have been old hands at the game. The
way they got in and opened the safe shows that. But there's one little
thing that puzzles me. One of them was careless enough not to wear
gloves, and I'm bothered if I know what he was trying to do. I've traced
his finger-marks on the new varnish on the window sashes in every one of
the downstairs rooms. They are very distinct ones too."

"Right hand or left, or both?" asked Eustace.

"Oh, right every time. That's the funny thing. He must have been a
foolhardy fellow, and I rather think it was him that wrote that." He
took out a slip of paper from his pocket. "That's what he wrote, sir.
'I've got out, Eustace Borlsover, but I'll be back before long.' Some
gaol bird just escaped, I suppose. It will make it all the easier for us
to trace him. Do you know the writing, sir?"

"No," said Eustace; "it's not the writing of anyone I know."

"I'm not going to stay here any longer," said Eustace to Saunders at
luncheon. "I've got on far better during the last six months than ever I
expected, but I'm not going to run the risk of seeing that thing again.
I shall go up to town this afternoon. Get Morton to put my things
together, and join me with the car at Brighton on the day after
to-morrow. And bring the proofs of those two papers with you. We'll run
over them together."

"How long are you going to be away?"

"I can't say for certain, but be prepared to stay for some time. We've
stuck to work pretty closely through the summer, and I for one need a
holiday. I'll engage the rooms at Brighton. You'll find it best to break
the journey at Hitchin. I'll wire to you there at the Crown to tell you
the Brighton address."

The house he chose at Brighton was in a terrace. He had been there
before. It was kept by his old college gyp, a man of discreet silence,
who was admirably partnered by an excellent cook. The rooms were on the
first floor. The two bedrooms were at the back, and opened out of each
other. "Saunders can have the smaller one, though it is the only one
with a fireplace," he said. "I'll stick to the larger of the two, since
it's got a bathroom adjoining. I wonder what time he'll arrive with the
car."

Saunders came about seven, cold and cross and dirty. "We'll light the
fire in the dining-room," said Eustace, "and get Prince to unpack some
of the things while we are at dinner. What were the roads like?"

"Rotten; swimming with mud, and a beastly cold wind against us all day.
And this is July. Dear old England!"

"Yes," said Eustace, "I think we might do worse than leave dear old
England for a few months."

They turned in soon after twelve.

"You oughtn't to feel cold, Saunders," said Eustace, "when you can
afford to sport a great cat-skin lined coat like this. You do yourself
very well, all things considered. Look at those gloves, for instance.
Who could possibly feel cold when wearing them?"

"They are far too clumsy though for driving. Try them on and see," and
he tossed them through the door on to Eustace's bed, and went on with
his unpacking. A minute later he heard a shrill cry of terror. "Oh,
Lord," he heard, "it's in the glove! Quick, Saunders, quick!" Then came
a smacking thud. Eustace had thrown it from him. "I've chucked it into
the bathroom," he gasped, "it's hit the wall and fallen into the bath.
Come now if you want to help." Saunders, with a lighted candle in his
hand, looked over the edge of the bath. There it was, old and maimed,
dumb and blind, with a ragged hole in the middle, crawling, staggering,
trying to creep up the slippery sides, only to fall back helpless.

"Stay there," said Saunders. "I'll empty a collar box or something, and
we'll jam it in. It can't get out while I'm away."

"Yes, it can," shouted Eustace. "It's getting out now. It's climbing up
the plug chain. No, you brute, you filthy brute, you don't! Come back,
Saunders, it's getting away from me. I can't hold it; it's all slippery.
Curse its claw! Shut the window, you idiot! The top too, as well as the
bottom. You utter idiot! It's got out!" There was the sound of
something dropping on to the hard flagstones below, and Eustace fell
back fainting.

       *       *       *       *       *

For a fortnight he was ill.

"I don't know what to make of it," the doctor said to Saunders. "I can
only suppose that Mr. Borlsover has suffered some great emotional shock.
You had better let me send someone to help you nurse him. And by all
means indulge that whim of his never to be left alone in the dark. I
would keep a light burning all night if I were you. But he _must_ have
more fresh air. It's perfectly absurd this hatred of open windows."

Eustace, however, would have no one with him but Saunders. "I don't want
the other men," he said. "They'd smuggle it in somehow. I know they
would."

"Don't worry about it, old chap. This sort of thing can't go on
indefinitely. You know I saw it this time as well as you. It wasn't half
so active. It won't go on living much longer, especially after that
fall. I heard it hit the flags myself. As soon as you're a bit stronger
we'll leave this place; not bag and baggage, but with only the clothes
on our backs, so that it won't be able to hide anywhere. We'll escape it
that way. We won't give any address, and we won't have any parcels sent
after us. Cheer up, Eustace! You'll be well enough to leave in a day or
two. The doctor says I can take you out in a chair to-morrow."

"What have I done?" asked Eustace. "Why does it come after me? I'm no
worse than other men. I'm no worse than you, Saunders; you know I'm not.
It was you who were at the bottom of that dirty business in San Diego,
and that was fifteen years ago."

"It's not that, of course," said Saunders. "We are in the twentieth
century, and even the parsons have dropped the idea of your old sins
finding you out. Before you caught the hand in the library it was filled
with pure malevolence--to you and all mankind. After you spiked it
through with that nail it naturally forgot about other people, and
concentrated its attention on you. It was shut up in the safe, you know,
for nearly six months. That gives plenty of time for thinking of
revenge."

Eustace Borlsover would not leave his room, but he thought that there
might be something in Saunders's suggestion to leave Brighton without
notice. He began rapidly to regain his strength.

"We'll go on the first of September," he said.

       *       *       *       *       *

The evening of August 31st was oppressively warm. Though at midday the
windows had been wide open, they had been shut an hour or so before
dusk. Mrs. Prince had long since ceased to wonder at the strange habits
of the gentlemen on the first floor. Soon after their arrival she had
been told to take down the heavy window curtains in the two bedrooms,
and day by day the rooms had seemed to grow more bare. Nothing was left
lying about.

"Mr. Borlsover doesn't like to have any place where dirt can collect,"
Saunders had said as an excuse. "He likes to see into all the corners of
the room."

"Couldn't I open the window just a little?" he said to Eustace that
evening. "We're simply roasting in here, you know."

"No, leave well alone. We're not a couple of boarding-school misses
fresh from a course of hygiene lectures. Get the chessboard out."

They sat down and played. At ten o'clock Mrs. Prince came to the door
with a note. "I am sorry I didn't bring it before," she said, "but it
was left in the letter-box."

"Open it, Saunders, and see if it wants answering."

It was very brief. There was neither address nor signature.


"Will eleven o'clock to-night be suitable for our last appointment?"


"Who is it from?" asked Borlsover.

"It was meant for me," said Saunders. "There's no answer, Mrs. Prince,"
and he put the paper into his pocket. "A dunning letter from a tailor; I
suppose he must have got wind of our leaving."

It was a clever lie, and Eustace asked no more questions. They went on
with their game.

On the landing outside Saunders could hear the grandfather's clock
whispering the seconds, blurting out the quarter-hours.

"Check!" said Eustace. The clock struck eleven. At the same time there
was a gentle knocking on the door; it seemed to come from the bottom
panel.

"Who's there?" asked Eustace.

There was no answer.

"Mrs. Prince, is that you?"

"She is up above," said Saunders; "I can hear her walking about the
room."

"Then lock the door; bolt it too. Your move, Saunders."

While Saunders sat with his eyes on the chessboard, Eustace walked over
to the window and examined the fastenings. He did the same in Saunders's
room and the bathroom. There were no doors between the three rooms, or
he would have shut and locked them too.

"Now, Saunders," he said, "don't stay all night over your move. I've had
time to smoke one cigarette already. It's bad to keep an invalid
waiting. There's only one possible thing for you to do. What was that?"

"The ivy blowing against the window. There, it's your move now,
Eustace."

"It wasn't the ivy, you idiot. It was someone tapping at the window,"
and he pulled up the blind. On the outer side of the window, clinging to
the sash, was the hand.

"What is it that it's holding?"

"It's a pocket-knife. It's going to try to open the window by pushing
back the fastener with the blade."

"Well, let it try," said Eustace. "Those fasteners screw down; they
can't be opened that way. Anyhow, we'll close the shutters. It's your
move, Saunders. I've played."

But Saunders found it impossible to fix his attention on the game. He
could not understand Eustace, who seemed all at once to have lost his
fear. "What do you say to some wine?" he asked. "You seem to be taking
things coolly, but I don't mind confessing that I'm in a blessed funk."

"You've no need to be. There's nothing supernatural about that hand,
Saunders. I mean it seems to be governed by the laws of time and space.
It's not the sort of thing that vanishes into thin air or slides through
oaken doors. And since that's so, I defy it to get in here. We'll leave
the place in the morning. I for one have bottomed the depths of fear.
Fill your glass, man! The windows are all shuttered, the door is locked
and bolted. Pledge me my uncle Adrian! Drink, man! What are you waiting
for?"

Saunders was standing with his glass half raised. "It can get in," he
said hoarsely; "it can get in! We've forgotten. There's the fireplace in
my bedroom. It will come down the chimney."

"Quick!" said Eustace, as he rushed into the other room; "we haven't a
minute to lose. What can we do? Light the fire, Saunders. Give me a
match, quick!"

"They must be all in the other room. I'll get them."

"Hurry, man, for goodness' sake! Look in the bookcase! Look in the
bathroom! Here, come and stand here; I'll look."

"Be quick!" shouted Saunders. "I can hear something!"

"Then plug a sheet from your bed up the chimney. No, here's a match." He
had found one at last that had slipped into a crack in the floor.

"Is the fire laid? Good, but it may not burn. I know--the oil from that
old reading-lamp and this cotton-wool. Now the match, quick! Pull the
sheet away, you fool! We don't want it now."

There was a great roar from the grate as the flames shot up. Saunders
had been a fraction of a second too late with the sheet. The oil had
fallen on to it. It, too, was burning.

"The whole place will be on fire!" cried Eustace, as he tried to beat
out the flames with a blanket. "It's no good! I can't manage it. You
must open the door, Saunders, and get help."

Saunders ran to the door and fumbled with the bolts. The key was stiff
in the lock.

"Hurry!" shouted Eustace; "the whole place is ablaze!"

The key turned in the lock at last. For half a second Saunders stopped
to look back. Afterwards he could never be quite sure as to what he had
seen, but at the time he thought that something black and charred was
creeping slowly, very slowly, from the mass of flames towards Eustace
Borlsover. For a moment he thought of returning to his friend, but the
noise and the smell of the burning sent him running down the passage
crying, "Fire! Fire!" He rushed to the telephone to summon help, and
then back to the bathroom--he should have thought of that before--for
water. As he burst open the bedroom door there came a scream of terror
which ended suddenly, and then the sound of a heavy fall.



The Mass of Shadows

BY ANATOLE FRANCE

     From _Mother of Pearl_, by Anatole France. Copyright by John Lane
     Company. By permission of the publishers.


This tale the sacristan of the church of St. Eulalie at Neuville
d'Aumont told me, as we sat under the arbor of the White Horse, one fine
summer evening, drinking a bottle of old wine to the health of the dead
man, now very much at his ease, whom that very morning he had borne to
the grave with full honors, beneath a pall powdered with smart silver
tears.

"My poor father who is dead" (it is the sacristan who is speaking,) "was
in his lifetime a grave-digger. He was of an agreeable disposition, the
result, no doubt, of the calling he followed, for it has often been
pointed out that people who work in cemeteries are of a jovial turn.
Death has no terrors for them; they never give it a thought. I, for
instance, monsieur, enter a cemetery at night as little perturbed as
though it were the arbor of the White Horse. And if by chance I meet
with a ghost, I don't disturb myself in the least about it, for I
reflect that he may just as likely have business of his own to attend to
as I. I know the habits of the dead, and I know their character.
Indeed, so far as that goes, I know things of which the priests
themselves are ignorant. If I were to tell you all I have seen, you
would be astounded. But a still tongue makes a wise head, and my father,
who, all the same, delighted in spinning a yarn, did not disclose a
twentieth part of what he knew. To make up for this he often repeated
the same stories, and to my knowledge he told the story of Catherine
Fontaine at least a hundred times.

"Catherine Fontaine was an old maid whom he well remembered having seen
when he was a mere child. I should not be surprised if there were still,
perhaps, three old fellows in the district who could remember having
heard folks speak of her, for she was very well known and of excellent
reputation, though poor enough. She lived at the corner of the Rue aux
Nonnes, in the turret which is still to be seen there, and which formed
part of an old half-ruined mansion looking on to the garden of the
Ursuline nuns. On that turret can still be traced certain figures and
half-obliterated inscriptions. The late cure of St. Eulalie, Monsieur
Levasseur, asserted that there are the words in Latin, _Love is stronger
than death_, 'which is to be understood,' so he would add, 'of divine
love.'

"Catherine Fontaine lived by herself in this tiny apartment. She was a
lace-maker. You know, of course, that the lace made in our part of the
world was formerly held in high esteem. No one knew anything of her
relatives or friends. It was reported that when she was eighteen years
of age she had loved the young Chevalier d'Aumont-Clery, and had been
secretly affianced to him. But decent folk didn't believe a word of it,
and said it was nothing but a tale concocted because Catherine
Fontaine's demeanor was that of a lady rather than that of a working
woman, and because, moreover, she possessed beneath her white locks the
remains of great beauty. Her expression was sorrowful, and on one finger
she wore one of those rings fashioned by the goldsmith into the
semblance of two tiny hands clasped together. In former days folks were
accustomed to exchange such rings at their betrothal ceremony. I am sure
you know the sort of thing I mean.

"Catherine Fontaine lived a saintly life. She spent a great deal of time
in churches, and every morning, whatever might be the weather, she went
to assist at the six o'clock Mass at St. Eulalie.

"Now one December night, whilst she was in her little chamber, she was
awakened by the sound of bells, and nothing doubting that they were
ringing for the first Mass, the pious woman dressed herself, and came
downstairs and out into the street. The night was so obscure that not
even the walls of the houses were visible, and not a ray of light shone
from the murky sky. And such was the silence amid this black darkness,
that there was not even the sound of a distant dog barking, and a
feeling of aloofness from every living creature was perceptible. But
Catherine Fontaine knew well every single stone she stepped on, and, as
she could have found her way to the church with her eyes shut, she
reached without difficulty the corner of the Rue aux Nonnes and the Rue
de la Paroisse, where the timbered house stands with the tree of Jesse
carved on one of its massive beams. When she reached this spot she
perceived that the church doors were open, and that a great light was
streaming out from the wax tapers. She resumed her journey, and when she
had passed through the porch she found herself in the midst of a vast
congregation which entirely filled the church. But she did not recognize
any of the worshipers and was surprised to observe that all of these
people were dressed in velvets and brocades, with feathers in their
hats, and that they wore swords in the fashion of days gone by. Here
were gentlemen who carried tall canes with gold knobs, and ladies with
lace caps fastened with coronet-shaped combs. Chevaliers of the Order of
St. Louis extended their hands to these ladies, who concealed behind
their fans painted faces, of which only the powdered brow and the patch
at the corner of the eye were visible! All of them proceeded to take
their places without the slightest sound, and as they moved neither the
sound of their footsteps on the pavement, nor the rustle of their
garments could be heard. The lower places were filled with a crowd of
young artisans in brown jackets, dimity breeches, and blue stockings,
with their arms round the waists of pretty blushing girls who lowered
their eyes. Near the holy water stoups peasant women, in scarlet
petticoats and laced bodices, sat upon the ground as immovable as
domestic animals, whilst young lads, standing up behind them, stared out
from wide-open eyes and twirled their hats round and round on their
fingers, and all these sorrowful countenances seemed centred irremovably
on one and the same thought, at once sweet and sorrowful. On her knees,
in her accustomed place, Catherine Fontaine saw the priest advance
toward the altar, preceded by two servers. She recognized neither priest
nor clerks. The Mass began. It was a silent Mass, during which neither
the sound of the moving lips nor the tinkle of the bell was audible.
Catherine Fontaine felt that she was under the observation and the
influence also of her mysterious neighbor, and when, scarcely turning
her head, she stole a glance at him, she recognized the young Chevalier
d'Aumont-Clery, who had once loved her, and who had been dead for five
and forty years. She recognized him by a small mark which he had over
the left ear, and above all by the shadow which his long black eyelashes
cast upon his cheeks. He was dressed in his hunting clothes, scarlet
with gold lace, the very clothes he wore that day when he met her in St.
Leonard's Wood, begged of her a drink, and stole a kiss. He had
preserved his youth and good looks. When he smiled, he still displayed
magnificent teeth. Catherine said to him in an undertone:

"'Monseigneur, you who were my friend, and to whom in days gone by I
gave all that a girl holds most dear, may God keep you in His grace! O,
that He would at length inspire me with regret for the sin I committed
in yielding to you; for it is a fact that, though my hair is white and I
approach my end, I have not yet repented of having loved you. But, dear
dead friend and noble seigneur, tell me, who are these folk, habited
after the antique fashion, who are here assisting at this silent Mass?'

"The Chevalier d'Aumont-Clery replied in a voice feebler than a breath,
but none the less crystal clear:

"'Catherine, these men and women are souls from purgatory who have
grieved God by sinning as we ourselves sinned through love of the
creature, but who are not on that account cast off by God, inasmuch as
their sin, like ours, was not deliberate.

"'Whilst separated from those whom they loved upon earth, they are
purified in the cleansing fires of purgatory, they suffer the pangs of
absence, which is for them the most cruel of tortures. They are so
unhappy that an angel from heaven takes pity upon their love-torment. By
the permission of the Most High, for one hour in the night, he reunites
each year lover to loved in their parish church, where they are
permitted to assist at the Mass of Shadows, hand clasped in hand. These
are the facts. If it has been granted to me to see thee before thy
death, Catherine, it is a boon which is bestowed by God's special
permission.'

"And Catherine Fontaine answered him:

"'I would die gladly enough, dear, dead lord, if I might recover the
beauty that was mine when I gave you to drink in the forest.'

"Whilst they thus conversed under their breath, a very old canon was
taking the collection and proffering to the worshipers a great copper
dish, wherein they let fall, each in his turn, ancient coins which have
long since ceased to pass current: ecus of six livres, florins, ducats
and ducatoons, jacobuses and rose-nobles, and the pieces fell silently
into the dish. When at length it was placed before the Chevalier, he
dropped into it a louis which made no more sound than had the other
pieces of gold and silver.

"Then the old canon stopped before Catherine Fontaine, who fumbled in
her pocket without being able to find a farthing. Then, being unwilling
to allow the dish to pass without an offering from herself, she slipped
from her finger the ring which the Chevalier had given her the day
before his death, and cast it into the copper bowl. As the golden ring
fell, a sound like the heavy clang of a bell rang out, and on the stroke
of this reverberation the Chevalier, the canon, the celebrant, the
servers, the ladies and their cavaliers, the whole assembly vanished
utterly; the candles guttered out, and Catherine Fontaine was left alone
in the darkness."

Having concluded his narrative after this fashion, the sacristan drank a
long draught of wine, remained pensive for a moment, and then resumed
his talk in these words:

"I have told you this tale exactly as my father has told it to me over
and over again, and I believe that it is authentic, because it agrees in
all respects with what I have observed of the manners and customs
peculiar to those who have passed away. I have associated a good deal
with the dead ever since my childhood, and I know that they are
accustomed to return to what they have loved.

"It is on this account that the miserly dead wander at night in the
neighborhood of the treasures they conceal during their life time. They
keep a strict watch over their gold; but the trouble they give
themselves, far from being of service to them, turns to their
disadvantage; and it is not a rare thing at all to come upon money
buried in the ground on digging in a place haunted by a ghost. In the
same way deceased husbands come by night to harass their wives who have
made a second matrimonial venture, and I could easily name several who
have kept a better watch over their wives since death than they ever did
while living.

"That sort of thing is blameworthy, for in all fairness the dead have no
business to stir up jealousies. Still I do but tell you what I have
observed myself. It is a matter to take into account if one marries a
widow. Besides, the tale I have told you is vouchsafed for in the
manner following:

"The morning after that extraordinary night Catherine Fontaine was
discovered dead in her chamber. And the beadle attached to St. Eulalie
found in the copper bowl used for the collection a gold ring with two
clasped hands. Besides, I'm not the kind of man to make jokes. Suppose
we order another bottle of wine?..."




What Was It?

BY FITZ-JAMES O'BRIEN


It is, I confess, with considerable diffidence, that I approach the
strange narrative which I am about to relate. The events which I purpose
detailing are of so extraordinary a character that I am quite prepared
to meet with an unusual amount of incredulity and scorn. I accept all
such beforehand. I have, I trust, the literary courage to face unbelief.
I have, after mature consideration resolved to narrate, in as simple and
straightforward a manner as I can compass, some facts that passed under
my observation, in the month of July last, and which, in the annals of
the mysteries of physical science, are wholly unparalleled.

I live at No. ---- Twenty-sixth Street, in New York. The house is in some
respects a curious one. It has enjoyed for the last two years the
reputation of being haunted. It is a large and stately residence,
surrounded by what was once a garden, but which is now only a green
enclosure used for bleaching clothes. The dry basin of what has been a
fountain, and a few fruit trees ragged and unpruned, indicate that this
spot in past days was a pleasant, shady retreat, filled with fruits and
flowers and the sweet murmur of waters.

The house is very spacious. A hall of noble size leads to a large spiral
staircase winding through its center, while the various apartments are
of imposing dimensions. It was built some fifteen or twenty years since
by Mr. A----, the well-known New York merchant, who five years ago threw
the commercial world into convulsions by a stupendous bank fraud. Mr.
A----, as everyone knows, escaped to Europe, and died not long after, of
a broken heart. Almost immediately after the news of his decease reached
this country and was verified, the report spread in Twenty-sixth Street
that No. ---- was haunted. Legal measures had dispossessed the widow of
its former owner, and it was inhabited merely by a caretaker and his
wife, placed there by the house agent into whose hands it had passed for
the purposes of renting or sale. These people declared that they were
troubled with unnatural noises. Doors were opened without any visible
agency. The remnants of furniture scattered through the various rooms
were, during the night, piled one upon the other by unknown hands.
Invisible feet passed up and down the stairs in broad daylight,
accompanied by the rustle of unseen silk dresses, and the gliding of
viewless hands along the massive balusters. The caretaker and his wife
declared they would live there no longer. The house agent laughed,
dismissed them, and put others in their place. The noises and
supernatural manifestations continued. The neighborhood caught up the
story, and the house remained untenanted for three years. Several
persons negotiated for it; but, somehow, always before the bargain was
closed they heard the unpleasant rumors and declined to treat any
further.

It was in this state of things that my landlady, who at that time kept a
boarding-house in Bleecker Street, and who wished to move further up
town, conceived the bold idea of renting No. ---- Twenty-sixth Street.
Happening to have in her house rather a plucky and philosophical set of
boarders, she laid her scheme before us, stating candidly everything she
had heard respecting the ghostly qualities of the establishment to which
she wished to remove us. With the exception of two timid persons,--a
sea-captain and a returned Californian, who immediately gave notice that
they would leave,--all of Mrs. Moffat's guests declared that they would
accompany her in her chivalric incursion into the abode of spirits.

Our removal was effected in the month of May, and we were charmed with
our new residence. The portion of Twenty-sixth Street where our house is
situated, between Seventh and Eighth Avenues, is one of the pleasantest
localities in New York. The gardens back of the houses, running down
nearly to the Hudson, form, in the summer time, a perfect avenue of
verdure. The air is pure and invigorating, sweeping, as it does,
straight across the river from the Weehawken heights, and even the
ragged garden which surrounded the house, although displaying on washing
days rather too much clothesline, still gave us a piece of greensward to
look at, and a cool retreat in the summer evenings, where we smoked our
cigars in the dusk, and watched the fireflies flashing their dark
lanterns in the long grass.

Of course we had no sooner established ourselves at No. ---- than we
began to expect ghosts. We absolutely awaited their advent with
eagerness. Our dinner conversation was supernatural. One of the
boarders, who had purchased Mrs. Crowe's _Night Side of Nature_ for his
own private delectation, was regarded as a public enemy by the entire
household for not having bought twenty copies. The man led a life of
supreme wretchedness while he was reading this volume. A system of
espionage was established, of which he was the victim. If he
incautiously laid the book down for an instant and left the room, it was
immediately seized and read aloud in secret places to a select few. I
found myself a person of immense importance, it having leaked out that I
was tolerably well versed in the history of supernaturalism, and had
once written a story the foundation of which was a ghost. If a table or
a wainscot panel happened to warp when we were assembled in the large
drawing-room, there was an instant silence, and everyone was prepared
for an immediate clanking of chains and a spectral form.

After a month of psychological excitement, it was with the utmost
dissatisfaction that we were forced to acknowledge that nothing in the
remotest degree approaching the supernatural had manifested itself. Once
the black butler asseverated that his candle had been blown out by some
invisible agency while he was undressing himself for the night; but as I
had more than once discovered this colored gentleman in a condition when
one candle must have appeared to him like two, thought it possible that,
by going a step further in his potations, he might have reversed this
phenomenon, and seen no candle at all where he ought to have beheld one.

Things were in this state when an accident took place so awful and
inexplicable in its character that my reason fairly reels at the bare
memory of the occurrence. It was the tenth of July. After dinner was
over I repaired, with my friend Dr. Hammond, to the garden to smoke my
evening pipe. Independent of certain mental sympathies which existed
between the Doctor and myself, we were linked together by a vice. We
both smoked opium. We knew each other's secret, and respected it. We
enjoyed together that wonderful expansion of thought, that marvelous
intensifying of the perceptive faculties, that boundless feeling of
existence when we seem to have points of contact with the whole
universe,--in short, that unimaginable spiritual bliss, which I would
not surrender for a throne, and which I hope you, reader, will
never--never taste.

Those hours of opium happiness which the Doctor and I spent together in
secret were regulated with a scientific accuracy. We did not blindly
smoke the drug of paradise, and leave our dreams to chance. While
smoking, we carefully steered our conversation through the brightest and
calmest channels of thought. We talked of the East, and endeavored to
recall the magical panorama of its glowing scenery. We criticized the
most sensuous poets,--those who painted life ruddy with health, brimming
with passion, happy in the possession of youth and strength and beauty.
If we talked of Shakespeare's _Tempest_, we lingered over Ariel, and
avoided Caliban. Like the Guebers, we turned our faces to the East, and
saw only the sunny side of the world.

This skillful coloring of our train of thought produced in our
subsequent visions a corresponding tone. The splendors of Arabian
fairyland dyed our dreams. We paced the narrow strip of grass with the
tread and port of kings. The song of the _Rana arborea_, while he clung
to the bark of the ragged plum-tree, sounded like the strains of divine
musicians. Houses, walls, and streets melted like rain clouds, and
vistas of unimaginable glory stretched away before us. It was a
rapturous companionship. We enjoyed the vast delight more perfectly
because, even in our most ecstatic moments, we were conscious of each
other's presence. Our pleasures, while individual, were still twin,
vibrating and moving in musical accord.

On the evening in question, the tenth of July, the Doctor and myself
drifted into an unusually metaphysical mood. We lit our large
meerschaums, filled with fine Turkish tobacco, in the core of which
burned a little black nut of opium, that, like the nut in the fairy
tale, held within its narrow limits wonders beyond the reach of kings;
we paced to and fro, conversing. A strange perversity dominated the
currents of our thought. They would _not_ flow through the sun-lit
channels into which we strove to divert them. For some unaccountable
reason, they constantly diverged into dark and lonesome beds, where a
continual gloom brooded. It was in vain that, after our old fashion, we
flung ourselves on the shores of the East, and talked of its gay
bazaars, of the splendors of the time of Haroun, of harems and golden
palaces. Black afreets continually arose from the depths of our talk,
and expanded, like the one the fisherman released from the copper
vessel, until they blotted everything bright from our vision.
Insensibly, we yielded to the occult force that swayed us, and indulged
in gloomy speculation. We had talked some time upon the proneness of the
human mind to mysticism, and the almost universal love of the terrible,
when Hammond suddenly said to me. "What do you consider to be the
greatest element of terror?"

The question puzzled me. That many things were terrible, I knew.
Stumbling over a corpse in the dark; beholding, as I once did, a woman
floating down a deep and rapid river, with wildly lifted arms, and
awful, upturned face, uttering, as she drifted, shrieks that rent one's
heart while we, spectators, stood frozen at a window which overhung the
river at a height of sixty feet, unable to make the slightest effort to
save her, but dumbly watching her last supreme agony and her
disappearance. A shattered wreck, with no life visible, encountered
floating listlessly on the ocean, is a terrible object, for it suggests
a huge terror, the proportions of which are veiled. But it now struck
me, for the first time, that there must be one great and ruling
embodiment of fear,--a King of Terrors, to which all others must
succumb. What might it be? To what train of circumstances would it owe
its existence?

"I confess, Hammond," I replied to my friend, "I never considered the
subject before. That there must be one Something more terrible than any
other thing, I feel. I cannot attempt, however, even the most vague
definition."

"I am somewhat like you, Harry," he answered. "I feel my capacity to
experience a terror greater than anything yet conceived by the human
mind;--something combining in fearful and unnatural amalgamation
hitherto supposed incompatible elements. The calling of the voices in
Brockden Brown's novel of _Wieland_ is awful; so is the picture of the
Dweller of the Threshold, in Bulwer's _Zanoni_; but," he added, shaking
his head gloomily, "there is something more horrible still than those."

"Look here, Hammond," I rejoined, "let us drop this kind of talk, for
Heaven's sake! We shall suffer for it, depend on it."

"I don't know what's the matter with me to-night," he replied, "but my
brain is running upon all sorts of weird and awful thoughts. I feel as
if I could write a story like Hoffman, to-night, if I were only master
of a literary style."

"Well, if we are going to be Hoffmanesque in our talk, I'm off to bed.
Opium and nightmares should never be brought together. How sultry it is!
Good-night, Hammond."

"Good-night, Harry. Pleasant dreams to you."

"To you, gloomy wretch, afreets, ghouls, and enchanters."

We parted, and each sought his respective chamber. I undressed quickly
and got into bed, taking with me, according to my usual custom, a book,
over which I generally read myself to sleep. I opened the volume as soon
as I had laid my head upon the pillow, and instantly flung it to the
other side of the room. It was Goudon's _History of Monsters_,--a
curious French work, which I had lately imported from Paris, but which,
in the state of mind I had then reached, was anything but an agreeable
companion. I resolved to go to sleep at once; so, turning down my gas
until nothing but a little blue point of light glimmered on the top of
the tube, I composed myself to rest.

The room was in total darkness. The atom of gas that still remained
alight did not illuminate a distance of three inches round the burner. I
desperately drew my arm across my eyes, as if to shut out even the
darkness, and tried to think of nothing. It was in vain. The confounded
themes touched on by Hammond in the garden kept obtruding themselves on
my brain. I battled against them. I erected ramparts of would-be
blackness of intellect to keep them out. They still crowded upon me.
While I was lying still as a corpse, hoping that by a perfect physical
inaction I should hasten mental repose, an awful incident occurred. A
Something dropped, as it seemed, from the ceiling, plumb upon my chest,
and the next instant I felt two bony hands encircling my throat,
endeavoring to choke me.

I am no coward, and am possessed of considerable physical strength. The
suddenness of the attack, instead of stunning me, strung every nerve to
its highest tension. My body acted from instinct, before my brain had
time to realize the terrors of my position. In an instant I wound two
muscular arms around the creature, and squeezed it, with all the
strength of despair, against my chest. In a few seconds the bony hands
that had fastened on my throat loosened their hold, and I was free to
breathe once more. Then commenced a struggle of awful intensity.
Immersed in the most profound darkness, totally ignorant of the nature
of the Thing by which I was so suddenly attacked, finding my grasp
slipping every moment, by reason, it seemed to me, of the entire
nakedness of my assailant, bitten with sharp teeth in the shoulder,
neck, and chest, having every moment to protect my throat against a pair
of sinewy, agile hands, which my utmost efforts could not
confine,--these were a combination of circumstances to combat which
required all the strength, skill, and courage that I possessed.

At last, after a silent, deadly, exhausting struggle, I got my assailant
under by a series of incredible efforts of strength. Once pinned, with
my knee on what I made out to be its chest, I knew that I was victor. I
rested for a moment to breathe. I heard the creature beneath me panting
in the darkness, and felt the violent throbbing of a heart. It was
apparently as exhausted as I was; that was one comfort. At this moment I
remembered that I usually placed under my pillow, before going to bed, a
large yellow silk pocket handkerchief. I felt for it instantly; it was
there. In a few seconds more I had, after a fashion, pinioned the
creature's arms.

I now felt tolerably secure. There was nothing more to be done but to
turn on the gas, and, having first seen what my midnight assailant was
like, arouse the household. I will confess to being actuated by a
certain pride in not giving the alarm before; I wished to make the
capture alone and unaided.

Never losing my hold for an instant, I slipped from the bed to the
floor, dragging my captive with me. I had but a few steps to make to
reach the gas-burner; these I made with the greatest caution, holding
the creature in a grip like a vice. At last I got within arm's length of
the tiny speck of blue light which told me where the gas-burner lay.
Quick as lightning I released my grasp with one hand and let on the full
flood of light. Then I turned to look at my captive.

I cannot even attempt to give any definition of my sensations the
instant after I turned on the gas. I suppose I must have shrieked with
terror, for in less than a minute afterward my room was crowded with the
inmates of the house. I shudder now as I think of that awful moment. _I
saw nothing_! Yes; I had one arm firmly clasped round a breathing,
panting, corporeal shape, my other hand gripped with all its strength a
throat as warm, as apparently fleshy, as my own; and yet, with this
living substance in my grasp, with its body pressed against my own, and
all in the bright glare of a large jet of gas, I absolutely beheld
nothing! Not even an outline,--a vapor!

I do not, even at this hour, realize the situation in which I found
myself. I cannot recall the astounding incident thoroughly. Imagination
in vain tries to compass the awful paradox.

It breathed. I felt its warm breath upon my cheek. It struggled
fiercely. It had hands. They clutched me. Its skin was smooth, like my
own. There it lay, pressed close up against me, solid as stone,--and
yet utterly invisible!

I wonder that I did not faint or go mad on the instant. Some wonderful
instinct must have sustained me; for, absolutely, in place of loosening
my hold on the terrible Enigma, I seemed to gain an additional strength
in my moment of horror, and tightened my grasp with such wonderful force
that I felt the creature shivering with agony.

Just then Hammond entered my room at the head of the household. As soon
as he beheld my face--which, I suppose, must have been an awful sight to
look at--he hastened forward, crying, "Great heaven, Harry! what has
happened?"

"Hammond! Hammond!" I cried, "come here. O, this is awful! I have been
attacked in bed by something or other, which I have hold of; but I can't
see it,--I can't see it!"

Hammond, doubtless struck by the unfeigned horror expressed in my
countenance, made one or two steps forward with an anxious yet puzzled
expression. A very audible titter burst from the remainder of my
visitors. This suppressed laughter made me furious. To laugh at a human
being in my position! It was the worst species of cruelty. _Now_, I can
understand why the appearance of a man struggling violently, as it would
seem, with an airy nothing, and calling for assistance against a vision,
should have appeared ludicrous. _Then_, so great was my rage against the
mocking crowd that had I the power I would have stricken them dead
where they stood.

"Hammond! Hammond!" I cried again, despairingly, "for God's sake come to
me. I can hold the--the thing but a short while longer. It is
overpowering me. Help me! Help me!"

"Harry," whispered Hammond, approaching me, "you have been smoking too
much opium."

"I swear to you, Hammond, that this is no vision," I answered, in the
same low tone. "Don't you see how it shakes my whole frame with its
struggles? If you don't believe me, convince yourself. Feel it,--touch
it."

Hammond advanced and laid his hand in the spot I indicated. A wild cry
of horror burst from him. He had felt it!

In a moment he had discovered somewhere in my room a long piece of cord,
and was the next instant winding it and knotting it about the body of
the unseen being that I clasped in my arms.

"Harry," he said, in a hoarse, agitated voice, for, though he preserved
his presence of mind, he was deeply moved, "Harry, it's all safe now.
You may let go, old fellow, if you're tired. The Thing can't move."

I was utterly exhausted, and I gladly loosed my hold.

Hammond stood holding the ends of the cord that bound the Invisible,
twisted round his hand, while before him, self-supporting as it were, he
beheld a rope laced and interlaced, and stretching tightly around a
vacant space. I never saw a man look so thoroughly stricken with awe.
Nevertheless his face expressed all the courage and determination which
I knew him to possess. His lips, although white, were set firmly, and
one could perceive at a glance that, although stricken with fear, he was
not daunted.

The confusion that ensued among the guests of the house who were
witnesses of this extraordinary scene between Hammond and myself,--who
beheld the pantomime of binding this struggling Something,--who beheld
me almost sinking from physical exhaustion when my task of jailer was
over,--the confusion and terror that took possession of the bystanders,
when they saw all this, was beyond description. The weaker ones fled
from the apartment. The few who remained clustered near the door and
could not be induced to approach Hammond and his Charge. Still
incredulity broke out through their terror. They had not the courage to
satisfy themselves, and yet they doubted. It was in vain that I begged
of some of the men to come near and convince themselves by touch of the
existence in that room of a living being which was invisible. They were
incredulous, but did not dare to undeceive themselves. How could a
solid, living, breathing body be invisible, they asked. My reply was
this. I gave a sign to Hammond, and both of us--conquering our fearful
repugnance to touch the invisible creature--lifted it from the ground,
manacled as it was, and took it to my bed. Its weight was about that of
a boy of fourteen.

"Now my friends," I said, as Hammond and myself held the creature
suspended over the bed, "I can give you self-evident proof that here is
a solid, ponderable body, which, nevertheless, you cannot see. Be good
enough to watch the surface of the bed attentively."

I was astonished at my own courage in treating this strange event so
calmly; but I had recovered from my first terror, and felt a sort of
scientific pride in the affair, which dominated every other feeling.

The eyes of the bystanders were immediately fixed on my bed. At a given
signal Hammond and I let the creature fall. There was a dull sound of a
heavy body alighting on a soft mass. The timbers of the bed creaked. A
deep impression marked itself distinctly on the pillow, and on the bed
itself. The crowd who witnessed this gave a low cry, and rushed from the
room. Hammond and I were left alone with our Mystery.

We remained silent for some time, listening to the low, irregular
breathing of the creature on the bed, and watching the rustle of the
bedclothes as it impotently struggled to free itself from confinement.
Then Hammond spoke.

"Harry, this is awful."

"Ay, awful."

"But not unaccountable."

"Not unaccountable! What do you mean? Such a thing has never occurred
since the birth of the world. I know not what to think, Hammond. God
grant that I am not mad, and that this is not an insane fantasy!"

"Let us reason a little, Harry. Here is a solid body which we touch, but
which we cannot see. The fact is so unusual that it strikes us with
terror. Is there no parallel, though, for such a phenomenon? Take a
piece of pure glass. It is tangible and transparent. A certain chemical
coarseness is all that prevents its being so entirely transparent as to
be totally invisible. It is not _theoretically impossible_, mind you, to
make a glass which shall not reflect a single ray of light,--a glass so
pure and homogeneous in its atoms that the rays from the sun will pass
through it as they do through the air, refracted but not reflected. We
do not see the air, and yet we feel it."

"That's all very well, Hammond, but these are inanimate substances.
Glass does not breathe, air does not breathe. _This_ thing has a heart
that palpitates,--a will that moves it,--lungs that play, and inspire
and respire."

"You forget the phenomena of which we have so often heard of late,"
answered the Doctor, gravely. "At the meetings called 'spirit circles,'
invisible hands have been thrust into the hands of those persons round
the table,--warm, fleshly hands that seemed to pulsate with mortal
life."

"What? Do you think, then, that this thing is----"

"I don't know what it is," was the solemn reply; "but please the gods I
will, with your assistance, thoroughly investigate it."

We watched together, smoking many pipes, all night long, by the bedside
of the unearthly being that tossed and panted until it was apparently
wearied out. Then we learned by the low, regular breathing that it
slept.

The next morning the house was all astir. The boarders congregated on
the landing outside my room, and Hammond and myself were lions. We had
to answer a thousand questions as to the state of our extraordinary
prisoner, for as yet not one person in the house except ourselves could
be induced to set foot in the apartment.

The creature was awake. This was evidenced by the convulsive manner in
which the bedclothes were moved in its efforts to escape. There was
something truly terrible in beholding, as it were, those second-hand
indications of the terrible writhings and agonized struggles for liberty
which themselves were invisible.

Hammond and myself had racked our brains during the long night to
discover some means by which we might realize the shape and general
appearance of the Enigma. As well as we could make out by passing our
hands over the creature's form, its outlines and lineaments were human.
There was a mouth; a round, smooth head without hair; a nose, which,
however, was little elevated above the cheeks; and its hands and feet
felt like those of a boy. At first we thought of placing the being on a
smooth surface and tracing its outlines with chalk, as shoemakers trace
the outline of the foot. This plan was given up as being of no value.
Such an outline would give not the slightest idea of its conformation.

A happy thought struck me. We would take a cast of it in plaster of
Paris. This would give us the solid figure, and satisfy all our wishes.
But how to do it? The movements of the creature would disturb the
setting of the plastic covering, and distort the mold. Another thought.
Why not give it chloroform? It had respiratory organs,--that was evident
by its breathing. Once reduced to a state of insensibility, we could do
with it what we would. Doctor X---- was sent for; and after the worthy
physician had recovered from the first shock of amazement, he proceeded
to administer the chloroform. In three minutes afterward we were enabled
to remove the fetters from the creature's body, and a modeler was busily
engaged in covering the invisible form with the moist clay. In five
minutes more we had a mold, and before evening a rough facsimile of the
Mystery. It was shaped like a man--distorted, uncouth, and horrible, but
still a man. It was small, not over four feet and some inches in height,
and its limbs revealed a muscular development that was unparalleled. Its
face surpassed in hideousness anything I had ever seen. Gustav Dore, or
Callot, or Tony Johannot, never conceived anything so horrible. There
is a face in one of the latter's illustrations to _Un Voyage ou il vous
plaira_, which somewhat approaches the countenance of this creature, but
does not equal it. It was the physiognomy of what I should fancy a ghoul
might be. It looked as if it was capable of feeding on human flesh.

Having satisfied our curiosity, and bound every one in the house to
secrecy, it became a question what was to be done with our Enigma? It
was impossible that we should keep such a horror in our house; it was
equally impossible that such an awful being should be let loose upon the
world. I confess that I would have gladly voted for the creature's
destruction. But who would shoulder the responsibility? Who would
undertake the execution of this horrible semblance of a human being? Day
after day this question was deliberated gravely. The boarders all left
the house. Mrs. Moffat was in despair, and threatened Hammond and myself
with all sorts of legal penalties if we did not remove the Horror. Our
answer was, "We will go if you like, but we decline taking this creature
with us. Remove it yourself if you please. It appeared in your house. On
you the responsibility rests." To this there was, of course, no answer.
Mrs. Moffat could not obtain for love or money a person who would even
approach the Mystery.

The most singular part of the affair was that we were entirely ignorant
of what the creature habitually fed on. Everything in the way of
nutriment that we could think of was placed before it, but was never
touched. It was awful to stand by, day after day, and see the clothes
toss, and hear the hard breathing, and know that it was starving.

Ten, twelve days, a fortnight passed, and it still lived. The pulsations
of the heart, however, were daily growing fainter, and had now nearly
ceased. It was evident that the creature was dying for want of
sustenance. While this terrible life-struggle was going on, I felt
miserable. I could not sleep. Horrible as the creature was, it was
pitiful to think of the pangs it was suffering.

At last it died. Hammond and I found it cold and stiff one morning in
the bed. The heart had ceased to beat, the lungs to inspire. We hastened
to bury it in the garden. It was a strange funeral, the dropping of that
viewless corpse into the damp hole. The cast of its form I gave to
Doctor X----, who keeps it in his museum in Tenth Street.

As I am on the eve of a long journey from which I may not return, I have
drawn up this narrative of an event the most singular that has ever come
to my knowledge.



The Middle Toe of the Right Foot

BY AMBROSE BIERCE

     From _Can Such Things Be?_ by Ambrose Bierce. Copyright by the
     Neale Publishing Company. By permission of the publishers.


I

It is well known that the old Manton house is haunted. In all the rural
district near about, and even in the town of Marshall, a mile away, not
one person of unbiased mind entertains a doubt of it; incredulity is
confined to those opinionated persons who will be called "cranks" as
soon as the useful word shall have penetrated the intellectual demesne
of the Marshall _Advance_. The evidence that the house is haunted is of
two kinds; the testimony of disinterested witnesses who have had ocular
proof, and that of the house itself. The former may be disregarded and
ruled out on any of the various grounds of objection which may be urged
against it by the ingenious; but facts within the observation of all are
material and controlling.

In the first place the Manton house has been unoccupied by mortals for
more than ten years, and with its outbuildings is slowly falling into
decay--a circumstance which in itself the judicious will hardly venture
to ignore. It stands a little way off the loneliest reach of the
Marshall and Harriston road, in an opening which was once a farm and is
still disfigured with strips of rotting fence and half covered with
brambles overrunning a stony and sterile soil long unacquainted with the
plow. The house itself is in tolerably good condition, though badly
weather-stained and in dire need of attention from the glazier, the
smaller male population of the region having attested in the manner of
its kind its disapproval of dwelling without dwellers. It is two stories
in height, nearly square, its front pierced by a single doorway flanked
on each side by a window boarded up to the very top. Corresponding
windows above, not protected, serve to admit light and rain to the rooms
of the upper floor. Grass and weeds grow pretty rankly all about, and a
few shade trees, somewhat the worse for wind, and leaning all in one
direction, seem to be making a concerted effort to run away. In short,
as the Marshall town humorist explained in the columns of the _Advance_,
"the proposition that the Manton house is badly haunted is the only
logical conclusion from the premises." The fact that in this dwelling
Mr. Manton thought it expedient one night some ten years ago to rise and
cut the throats of his wife and two small children, removing at once to
another part of the country, has no doubt done its share in directing
public attention to the fitness of the place for supernatural phenomena.

To this house, one summer evening, came four men in a wagon. Three of
them promptly alighted, and the one who had been driving hitched the
team to the only remaining post of what had been a fence. The fourth
remained seated in the wagon. "Come," said one of his companions,
approaching him, while the others moved away in the direction of the
dwelling--"this is the place."

The man addressed did not move. "By God!" he said harshly, "this is a
trick, and it looks to me as if you were in it."

"Perhaps I am," the other said, looking him straight in the face and
speaking in a tone which had something of contempt in it. "You will
remember, however, that the choice of place was with your own assent
left to the other side. Of course if you are afraid of spooks--"

"I am afraid of nothing," the man interrupted with another oath, and
sprang to the ground. The two then joined the others at the door, which
one of them had already opened with some difficulty, caused by rust of
lock and hinge. All entered. Inside it was dark, but the man who had
unlocked the door produced a candle and matches and made a light. He
then unlocked a door on their right as they stood in the passage. This
gave them entrance to a large, square room that the candle but dimly
lighted. The floor had a thick carpeting of dust, which partly muffled
their footfalls. Cobwebs were in the angles of the walls and depended
from the ceiling like strips of rotting lace making undulatory movements
in the disturbed air. The room had two windows in adjoining sides, but
from neither could anything be seen except the rough inner surfaces of
boards a few inches from the glass. There was no fireplace, no
furniture; there was nothing: besides the cobwebs and the dust, the four
men were the only objects there which were not a part of the structure.

Strange enough they looked in the yellow light of the candle. The one
who had so reluctantly alighted was especially spectacular--he might
have been called sensational. He was of middle age, heavily built, deep
chested, and broad shouldered. Looking at his figure, one would have
said that he had a giant's strength; at his features, that he would use
it like a giant. He was clean shaven, his hair rather closely cropped
and gray. His low forehead was seamed with wrinkles above the eyes, and
over the nose these became vertical. The heavy black brows followed the
same law, saved from meeting only by an upward turn at what would
otherwise have been the point of contact. Deeply sunken beneath these,
glowed in the obscure light a pair of eyes of uncertain color, but
obviously enough too small. There was something forbidding in their
expression, which was not bettered by the cruel mouth and wide jaw. The
nose was well enough, as noses go; one does not expect much of noses.
All that was sinister in the man's face seemed accentuated by an
unnatural pallor--he appeared altogether bloodless.

The appearance of the other men was sufficiently commonplace; they were
such persons as one meets and forgets that he met. All were younger than
the man described, between whom and the eldest of the others, who stood
apart, there was apparently no kindly feeling. They avoided looking at
each other.

"Gentlemen," said the man holding the candle and keys, "I believe
everything is right. Are you ready, Mr. Rosser?"

The man standing apart from the group bowed and smiled.

"And you, Mr. Grossmith?"

The heavy man bowed and scowled.

"You will be pleased to remove your outer clothing."

Their hats, coats, waistcoats, and neckwear were soon removed and thrown
outside the door, in the passage. The man with the candle now nodded,
and the fourth man--he who had urged Grossmith to leave the
wagon--produced from the pocket of his overcoat two long,
murderous-looking bowie-knives, which he drew now from their leather
scabbards.

"They are exactly alike," he said, presenting one to each of the two
principals--for by this time the dullest observer would have understood
the nature of this meeting. It was to be a duel to the death.

Each combatant took a knife, examined it critically near the candle and
tested the strength of the blade and handle across his lifted knee. Their
persons were then searched in turn, each by the second of the other.

"If it is agreeable to you, Mr. Grossmith," said the man holding the
light, "you will place yourself in that corner."

He indicated the angle of the room farthest from the door, whither
Grossmith retired, his second parting from him with a grasp of the hand
which had nothing of cordiality in it. In the angle nearest the door Mr.
Rosser stationed himself, and after a whispered consultation his second
left him, joining the other near the door. At that moment the candle was
suddenly extinguished, leaving all in profound darkness. This may have
been done by a draught from the opened door; whatever the cause, the
effect was startling.

"Gentlemen," said a voice which sounded strangely unfamiliar in the
altered condition affecting the relations of the senses--"gentlemen, you
will not move until you hear the closing of the outer door."

A sound of trampling ensued, then the closing of the inner door; and
finally the outer one closed with a concussion which shook the entire
building.

A few minutes afterward a belated farmer's boy met a light wagon which
was being driven furiously toward the town of Marshall. He declared that
behind the two figures on the front seat stood a third, with its hands
upon the bowed shoulders of the others, who appeared to struggle vainly
to free themselves from its grasp. This figure, unlike the others, was
clad in white, and had undoubtedly boarded the wagon as it passed the
haunted house. As the lad could boast a considerable former experience
with the supernatural thereabouts his word had the weight justly due to
the testimony of an expert. The story (in connection with the next day's
events) eventually appeared in the _Advance_, with some slight literary
embellishments and a concluding intimation that the gentlemen referred
to would be allowed the use of the paper's columns for their version of
the night's adventure. But the privilege remained without a claimant.


II

The events that led up to this "duel in the dark" were simple enough.
One evening three young men of the town of Marshall were sitting in a
quiet corner of the porch of the village hotel, smoking and discussing
such matters as three educated young men of a Southern village would
naturally find interesting. Their names were King, Sancher, and Rosser.
At a little distance, within easy hearing, but taking no part in the
conversation, sat a fourth. He was a stranger to the others. They
merely knew that on his arrival by the stage-coach that afternoon he had
written in the hotel register the name of Robert Grossmith. He had not
been observed to speak to anyone except the hotel clerk. He seemed,
indeed, singularly fond of his own company--or, as the _personnel_ of
the _Advance_ expressed it, "grossly addicted to evil associations." But
then it should be said in justice to the stranger that the _personnel_
was himself of a too convivial disposition fairly to judge one
differently gifted, and had, moreover, experienced a slight rebuff in an
effort at an "interview."

"I hate any kind of deformity in a woman," said King, "whether natural
or--acquired. I have a theory that any physical defect has its
correlative mental and moral defect."

"I infer, then," said Rosser, gravely, "that a lady lacking the moral
advantage of a nose would find the struggle to become Mrs. King an
arduous enterprise."

"Of course you may put it that way," was the reply; "but, seriously, I
once threw over a most charming girl on learning quite accidentally that
she had suffered amputation of a toe. My conduct was brutal if you like,
but if I had married that girl I should have been miserable for life and
should have made her so."

"Whereas," said Sancher, with a light laugh, "by marrying a gentleman of
more liberal view she escaped with a parted throat."

"Ah, you know to whom I refer. Yes, she married Manton, but I don't know
about his liberality; I'm not sure but he cut her throat because he
discovered that she lacked that excellent thing in woman, the middle toe
of the right foot."

"Look at that chap!" said Rosser in a low voice, his eyes fixed upon the
stranger.

That chap was obviously listening intently to the conversation.

"Damn his impudence!" muttered King--"what ought we to do?"

"That's an easy one," Rosser replied, rising. "Sir," he continued,
addressing the stranger, "I think it would be better if you would remove
your chair to the other end of the veranda. The presence of gentlemen is
evidently an unfamiliar situation to you."

The man sprang to his feet and strode forward with clenched hands, his
face white with rage. All were now standing. Sancher stepped between the
belligerents.

"You are hasty and unjust," he said to Rosser; "this gentleman has done
nothing to deserve such language."

But Rosser would not withdraw a word. By the custom of the country and
the time there could be but one outcome to the quarrel.

"I demand the satisfaction due to a gentleman," said the stranger, who
had become more calm. "I have not an acquaintance in this region.
Perhaps you, sir," bowing to Sancher, "will be kind enough to represent
me in this matter."

Sancher accepted the trust--somewhat reluctantly it must be confessed,
for the man's appearance and manner were not at all to his liking. King,
who during the colloquy had hardly removed his eyes from the stranger's
face and had not spoken a word, consented with a nod to act for Rosser,
and the upshot of it was that, the principals having retired, a meeting
was arranged for the next evening. The nature of the arrangements has
been already disclosed. The duel with knives in a dark room was once a
commoner feature of Southwestern life than it is likely to be again. How
thin a veneering of "chivalry" covered the essential brutality of the
code under which such encounters were possible we shall see.


III

In the blaze of a midsummer noonday the old Manton house was hardly true
to its traditions. It was of the earth, earthy. The sunshine caressed it
warmly and affectionately, with evident disregard of its bad reputation.
The grass greening all the expanse in its front seemed to grow, not
rankly, but with a natural and joyous exuberance, and the weeds
blossomed quite like plants. Full of charming lights and shadows and
populous with pleasant-voiced birds, the neglected shade trees no longer
struggled to run away, but bent reverently beneath their burdens of sun
and song. Even in the glassless upper windows was an expression of peace
and contentment, due to the light within. Over the stony fields the
visible heat danced with a lively tremor incompatible with the gravity
which is an attribute of the supernatural.

Such was the aspect under which the place presented itself to Sheriff
Adams and two other men who had come out from Marshall to look at it.
One of these men was Mr. King, the sheriff's deputy; the other, whose
name was Brewer, was a brother of the late Mrs. Manton. Under a
beneficent law of the State relating to property which has been for a
certain period abandoned by an owner whose residence cannot be
ascertained, the sheriff was legal custodian of the Manton farm and
appurtenances thereunto belonging. His present visit was in mere
perfunctory compliance with some order of a court in which Mr. Brewer
had an action to get possession of the property as heir to his deceased
sister. By a mere coincidence, the visit was made on the day after the
night that Deputy King had unlocked the house for another and very
different purpose. His presence now was not of his own choosing: he had
been ordered to accompany his superior, and at the moment could think of
nothing more prudent than simulated alacrity in obedience to the
command.

Carelessly opening the front door, which to his surprise was not locked,
the sheriff was amazed to see, lying on the floor of the passage into
which it opened, a confused heap of men's apparel. Examination showed it
to consist of two hats, and the same number of coats, waistcoats, and
scarves all in a remarkably good state of preservation, albeit somewhat
defiled by the dust in which they lay. Mr. Brewer was equally
astonished, but Mr. King's emotion is not of record. With a new and
lively interest in his own actions the sheriff now unlatched and pushed
open a door on the right, and the three entered. The room was apparently
vacant--no; as their eyes became accustomed to the dimmer light
something was visible in the farthest angle of the wall. It was a human
figure--that of a man crouching close in the corner. Something in the
attitude made the intruders halt when they had barely passed the
threshold. The figure more and more clearly defined itself. The man was
upon one knee, his back in the angle of the wall, his shoulders elevated
to the level of his ears, his hands before his face, palms outward, the
fingers spread and crooked like claws; the white face turned upward on
the retracted neck had an expression of unutterable fright, the mouth
half open, the eyes incredibly expanded. He was stone dead. Yet with the
exception of a bowie-knife, which had evidently fallen from his own
hand, not another object was in the room.

In thick dust that covered the floor were some confused footprints near
the door and along the wall through which it opened. Along one of the
adjoining walls, too, past the boarded-up windows was the trail made by
the man himself in reaching his corner. Instinctively in approaching the
body the three men followed that trail. The sheriff grasped one of the
outthrown arms; it was as rigid as iron, and the application of a gentle
force rocked the entire body without altering the relation of its parts.
Brewer, pale with excitement, gazed intently into the distorted face.
"God of mercy!" he suddenly cried, "it is Manton!"

"You are right," said King, with an evident attempt at calmness: "I knew
Manton. He then wore a full beard and his hair long, but this is he."

He might have added: "I recognized him when he challenged Rosser. I told
Rosser and Sancher who he was before we played him this horrible trick.
When Rosser left this dark room at our heels, forgetting his outer
clothing in the excitement, and driving away with us in his shirt
sleeves--all through the discreditable proceedings we knew with whom we
were dealing, murderer and coward that he was!"

But nothing of this did Mr. King say. With his better light he was
trying to penetrate the mystery of the man's death. That he had not once
moved from the corner where he had been stationed; that his posture was
that of neither attack nor defense; that he had dropped his weapon; that
he had obviously perished of sheer horror of something that he
_saw_--these were circumstances which Mr. King's disturbed intelligence
could not rightly comprehend.

Groping in intellectual darkness for a clew to his maze of doubt, his
gaze, directed mechanically downward in the way of one who ponders
momentous matters, fell upon something which, there, in the light of day
and in the presence of living companions, affected him with terror. In
the dust of years that lay thick upon the floor--leading from the door
by which they had entered, straight across the room to within a yard of
Manton's crouching corpse--were three parallel lines of
footprints--light but definite impressions of bare feet, the outer ones
those of small children, the inner a woman's. From the point at which
they ended they did not return; they pointed all one way. Brewer, who
had observed them at the same moment, was leaning forward in an attitude
of rapt attention, horribly pale.

"Look at that!" he cried, pointing with both hands at the nearest print
of the woman's right foot, where she had apparently stopped and stood.
"The middle toe is missing--it was Gertrude!"

Gertrude was the late Mrs. Manton, sister to Mr. Brewer.



The Shell of Sense

BY OLIVIA HOWARD DUNBAR

     From Harper's Magazine, December, 1908. By permission of Harper and
     Brothers and Olivia Howard Dunbar.


It was intolerably unchanged, the dim, dark-toned room. In an agony of
recognition my glance ran from one to another of the comfortable,
familiar things that my earthly life had been passed among. Incredibly
distant from it all as I essentially was. I noted sharply that the very
gaps that I myself had left in my bookshelves still stood unfilled; that
the delicate fingers of the ferns that I had tended were still stretched
futilely toward the light; that the soft agreeable chuckle of my own
little clock, like some elderly woman with whom conversation has become
automatic, was undiminished.

Unchanged--or so it seemed at first. But there were certain trivial
differences that shortly smote me. The windows were closed too tightly;
for I had always kept the house very cool, although I had known that
Theresa preferred warm rooms. And my work-basket was in disorder; it was
preposterous that so small a thing should hurt me so. Then, for this was
my first experience of the shadow-folded transition, the odd alteration
of my emotions bewildered me. For at one moment the place seemed so
humanly familiar, so distinctly my own proper envelope, that for love of
it I could have laid my cheek against the wall; while in the next I was
miserably conscious of strange new shrillnesses. How could they be
endured--and had I ever endured them?--those harsh influences that I now
perceived at the window; light and color so blinding that they obscured
the form of the wind, tumult so discordant that one could scarcely hear
the roses open in the garden below?

But Theresa did not seem to mind any of these things. Disorder, it is
true, the dear child had never minded. She was sitting all this time at
my desk--at _my_ desk--occupied, I could only too easily surmise how. In
the light of my own habits of precision it was plain that that sombre
correspondence should have been attended to before; but I believe that I
did not really reproach Theresa, for I knew that her notes, when she did
write them, were perhaps less perfunctory than mine. She finished the
last one as I watched her, and added it to the heap of black-bordered
envelopes that lay on the desk. Poor girl! I saw now that they had cost
her tears. Yet, living beside her day after day, year after year, I had
never discovered what deep tenderness my sister possessed. Toward each
other it had been our habit to display only a temperate affection, and I
remember having always thought it distinctly fortunate for Theresa,
since she was denied my happiness, that she could live so easily and
pleasantly without emotions of the devastating sort.... And now, for the
first time, I was really to behold her.... Could it be Theresa, after
all, this tangle of subdued turbulences? Let no one suppose that it is
an easy thing to bear, the relentlessly lucid understanding that I then
first exercised; or that, in its first enfranchisement, the timid vision
does not yearn for its old screens and mists.

Suddenly, as Theresa sat there, her head, filled with its tender
thoughts of me, held in her gentle hands, I felt Allan's step on the
carpeted stair outside. Theresa felt it, too,--but how? for it was not
audible. She gave a start, swept the black envelopes out of sight, and
pretended to be writing in a little book. Then I forgot to watch her any
longer in my absorption in Allan's coming. It was he, of course, that I
was awaiting. It was for him that I had made this first lonely,
frightened effort to return, to recover.... It was not that I had
supposed he would allow himself to recognize my presence, for I had long
been sufficiently familiar with his hard and fast denials of the
invisible. He was so reasonable always, so sane--so blindfolded. But I
had hoped that because of his very rejection of the ether that now
contained me I could perhaps all the more safely, the more secretly,
watch him, linger near him. He was near now, very near,--but why did
Theresa, sitting there in the room that had never belonged to her,
appropriate for herself his coming? It was so manifestly I who had
drawn him, I whom he had come to seek.

The door was ajar. He knocked softly at it "Are you there, Theresa?" he
called. He expected to find her, then, there in my room? I shrank back,
fearing, almost, to stay.

"I shall have finished in a moment," Theresa told him, and he sat down
to wait for her.

No spirit still unreleased can understand the pang that I felt with
Allan sitting almost within my touch. Almost irresistibly the wish beset
me to let him for an instant feel my nearness. Then I checked myself,
remembering--oh, absurd, piteous human fears!--that my too unguarded
closeness might alarm him. It was not so remote a time that I myself had
known them, those blind, uncouth timidities. I came, therefore, somewhat
nearer--but I did not touch him. I merely leaned toward him and with
incredible softness whispered his name. That much I could not have
forborne; the spell of life was still too strong in me.

But it gave him no comfort, no delight. "Theresa!" he called, in a voice
dreadful with alarm--and in that instant the last veil fell, and
desperately, scarce believingly, I beheld how it stood between them,
those two.

She turned to him that gentle look of hers.

"Forgive me," came from him hoarsely. "But I had suddenly the
most--unaccountable sensation. Can there be too many windows open? There
is such a--chill--about."

"There are no windows open," Theresa assured him. "I took care to shut
out the chill. You are not well, Allan!"

"Perhaps not." He embraced the suggestion. "And yet I feel no illness
apart from this abominable sensation that persists--persists....
Theresa, you must tell me: do I fancy it, or do you, too,
feel--something--strange here?"

"Oh, there is something very strange here," she half sobbed. "There
always will be."

"Good heavens, child, I didn't mean that!" He rose and stood looking
about him. "I know, of course, that you have your beliefs, and I respect
them, but you know equally well that I have nothing of the sort!
So--don't let us conjure up anything inexplicable."

I stayed impalpably, imponderably near him. Wretched and bereft though I
was, I could not have left him while he stood denying me.

"What I mean," he went on, in his low, distinct voice, "is a special, an
almost ominous sense of cold. Upon my soul, Theresa,"--he paused--"if I
_were_ superstitious, if I _were_ a woman, I should probably imagine it
to seem--a presence!"

He spoke the last word very faintly, but Theresa shrank from it
nevertheless.

"_Don't_ say that, Allan!" she cried out. "Don't think it, I beg of you!
I've tried so hard myself not to think it--and you must help me. You
know it is only perturbed, uneasy spirits that wander. With her it is
quite different. She has always been so happy--she must still be."

I listened, stunned, to Theresa's sweet dogmatism. From what blind
distances came her confident misapprehensions, how dense, both for her
and for Allan, was the separating vapor!

Allan frowned. "Don't take me literally, Theresa," he explained; and I,
who a moment before had almost touched him, now held myself aloof and
heard him with a strange untried pity, new born in me. "I'm not speaking
of what you call--spirits. It's something much more terrible." He
allowed his head to sink heavily on his chest. "If I did not positively
know that I had never done her any harm, I should suppose myself to be
suffering from guilt, from remorse.... Theresa, you know better than I,
perhaps. Was she content, always? Did she believe in me?"

"Believe in you?--when she knew you to be so good!--when you adored
her!"

"She thought that? She said it? Then what in Heaven's name ails
me?--unless it is all as you believe, Theresa, and she knows now what
she didn't know then, poor dear, and minds----"

"Minds what? What do you mean, Allan?"

I, who with my perhaps illegitimate advantage saw so clear, knew that he
had not meant to tell her: I did him that justice, even in my first
jealousy. If I had not tortured him so by clinging near him, he would
not have told her. But the moment came, and overflowed, and he did tell
her--passionate, tumultuous story that it was. During all our life
together, Allan's and mine, he had spared me, had kept me wrapped in the
white cloak of an unblemished loyalty. But it would have been kinder, I
now bitterly thought, if, like many husbands, he had years ago found for
the story he now poured forth some clandestine listener; I should not
have known. But he was faithful and good, and so he waited till I, mute
and chained, was there to hear him. So well did I know him, as I
thought, so thoroughly had he once been mine, that I saw it in his eyes,
heard it in his voice, before the words came. And yet, when it came, it
lashed me with the whips of an unbearable humiliation. For I, his wife,
had not known how greatly he could love.

And that Theresa, soft little traitor, should, in her still way, have
cared too! Where was the iron in her, I moaned within my stricken
spirit, where the steadfastness? From the moment he bade her, she turned
her soft little petals up to him--and my last delusion was spent. It was
intolerable; and none the less so that in another moment she had,
prompted by some belated thought of me, renounced him. Allan was hers,
yet she put him from her; and it was my part to watch them both.

Then in the anguish of it all I remembered, awkward, untutored spirit
that I was, that I now had the Great Recourse. Whatever human things
were unbearable, I had no need to bear. I ceased, therefore, to make
the effort that kept me with them. The pitiless poignancy was dulled,
the sounds and the light ceased, the lovers faded from me, and again I
was mercifully drawn into the dim, infinite spaces.

       *       *       *       *       *

There followed a period whose length I cannot measure and during which I
was able to make no progress in the difficult, dizzying experience of
release. "Earth-bound" my jealousy relentlessly kept me. Though my two
dear ones had forsworn each other, I could not trust them, for theirs
seemed to me an affectation of a more than mortal magnanimity. Without a
ghostly sentinel to prick them with sharp fears and recollections, who
could believe that they would keep to it? Of the efficacy of my own
vigilance, so long as I might choose to exercise it, I could have no
doubt, for I had by this time come to have a dreadful exultation in the
new power that lived in me. Repeated delicate experiment had taught me
how a touch or a breath, a wish or a whisper, could control Allan's
acts, could keep him from Theresa. I could manifest myself as palely, as
transiently, as a thought. I could produce the merest necessary flicker,
like the shadow of a just-opened leaf, on his trembling, tortured
consciousness. And these unrealized perceptions of me he interpreted, as
I had known that he would, as his soul's inevitable penance. He had come
to believe that he had done evil in silently loving Theresa all these
years, and it was my vengeance to allow him to believe this, to prod
him ever to believe it afresh.

I am conscious that this frame of mind was not continuous in me. For I
remember, too, that when Allan and Theresa were safely apart and
sufficiently miserable I loved them as dearly as I ever had, more dearly
perhaps. For it was impossible that I should not perceive, in my new
emancipation, that they were, each of them, something more and greater
than the two beings I had once ignorantly pictured them. For years they
had practiced a selflessness of which I could once scarcely have
conceived, and which even now I could only admire without entering into
its mystery. While I had lived solely for myself, these two divine
creatures had lived exquisitely for me. They had granted me everything,
themselves nothing. For my undeserving sake their lives had been a
constant torment of renunciation--a torment they had not sought to
alleviate by the exchange of a single glance of understanding. There
were even marvelous moments when, from the depths of my newly informed
heart, I pitied them--poor creatures, who, withheld from the infinite
solaces that I had come to know, were still utterly within that

                            Shell of sense
    So frail, so piteously contrived for pain.

Within it, yes; yet exercising qualities that so sublimely transcended
it. Yet the shy, hesitating compassion that thus had birth in me was
far from being able to defeat the earlier, earthlier emotion. The two, I
recognized, were in a sort of conflict; and I, regarding it, assumed
that the conflict would never end; that for years, as Allan and Theresa
reckoned time, I should be obliged to withhold myself from the great
spaces and linger suffering, grudging, shamed, where they lingered.

       *       *       *       *       *

It can never have been explained, I suppose, what, to devitalized
perception such as mine, the contact of mortal beings with each other
appears to be. Once to have exercised this sense-freed perception is to
realize that the gift of prophecy, although the subject of such frequent
marvel, is no longer mysterious. The merest glance of our sensitive and
uncloyed vision can detect the strength of the relation between two
beings, and therefore instantly calculate its duration. If you see a
heavy weight suspended from a slender string, you can know, without any
wizardry, that in a few moments the string will snap; well, such, if you
admit the analogy, is prophecy, is foreknowledge. And it was thus that I
saw it with Theresa and Allan. For it was perfectly visible to me that
they would very little longer have the strength to preserve, near each
other, the denuded impersonal relation that they, and that I, behind
them, insisted on; and that they would have to separate. It was my
sister, perhaps the more sensitive, who first realized this. It had now
become possible for me to observe them almost constantly, the effort
necessary to visit them had so greatly diminished; so that I watched
her, poor, anguished girl, prepare to leave him. I saw each reluctant
movement that she made. I saw her eyes, worn from self-searching; I
heard her step grown timid from inexplicable fears; I entered her very
heart and heard its pitiful, wild beating. And still I did not
interfere.

For at this time I had a wonderful, almost demoniacal sense of disposing
of matters to suit my own selfish will. At any moment I could have
checked their miseries, could have restored happiness and peace. Yet it
gave me, and I could weep to admit it, a monstrous joy to know that
Theresa thought she was leaving Allan of her own free intention, when it
was I who was contriving, arranging, insisting.... And yet she
wretchedly felt my presence near her; I am certain of that.

A few days before the time of her intended departure my sister told
Allan that she must speak with him after dinner. Our beautiful old house
branched out from a circular hall with great arched doors at either end;
and it was through the rear doorway that always in summer, after dinner,
we passed out into the garden adjoining. As usual, therefore, when the
hour came, Theresa led the way. That dreadful daytime brilliance that in
my present state I found so hard to endure was now becoming softer. A
delicate, capricious twilight breeze danced inconsequently through
languidly whispering leaves. Lovely pale flowers blossomed like little
moons in the dusk, and over them the breath of mignonette hung heavily.
It was a perfect place--and it had so long been ours, Allan's and mine.
It made me restless and a little wicked that those two should be there
together now.

For a little they walked about together, speaking of common, daily
things. Then suddenly Theresa burst out:

"I am going away, Allan. I have stayed to do everything that needed to
be done. Now your mother will be here to care for you, and it is time
for me to go."

He stared at her and stood still. Theresa had been there so long, she so
definitely, to his mind, belonged there. And she was, as I also had
jealously known, so lovely there, the small, dark, dainty creature, in
the old hall, on the wide staircases, in the garden.... Life there
without Theresa, even the intentionally remote, the perpetually
renounced Theresa--he had not dreamed of it, he could not, so suddenly,
conceive of it.

"Sit here," he said, and drew her down beside him on a bench, "and tell
me what it means, why you are going. Is it because of something that I
have been--have done?"

She hesitated. I wondered if she would dare tell him. She looked out and
away from him, and he waited long for her to speak.

The pale stars were sliding into their places. The whispering of the
leaves was almost hushed. All about them it was still and shadowy and
sweet. It was that wonderful moment when, for lack of a visible horizon,
the not yet darkened world seems infinitely greater--a moment when
anything can happen, anything be believed in. To me, watching,
listening, hovering, there came a dreadful purpose and a dreadful
courage. Suppose for one moment, Theresa should not only feel, but _see_
me--would she dare to tell him then?

There came a brief space of terrible effort, all my fluttering,
uncertain forces strained to the utmost. The instant of my struggle was
endlessly long and the transition seemed to take place outside me--as
one sitting in a train, motionless, sees the leagues of earth float by.
And then, in a bright, terrible flash I knew I had achieved it--I had
_attained visibility_. Shuddering, insubstantial, but luminously
apparent, I stood there before them. And for the instant that I
maintained the visible state I looked straight into Theresa's soul.

She gave a cry. And then, thing of silly, cruel impulses that I was, I
saw what I had done. The very thing that I wished to avert I had
precipitated. For Allan, in his sudden terror and pity, had bent and
caught her in his arms. For the first time they were together; and it
was I who had brought them.

Then, to his whispered urging to tell the reason of her cry, Theresa
said:

"Frances was here. You did not see her, standing there, under the
lilacs, with no smile on her face?"

"My dear, my dear!" was all that Allan said. I had so long now lived
invisibly with them, he knew that she was right.

"I suppose you know what it means?" she asked him, calmly.

"Dear Theresa," Allan said, slowly, "if you and I should go away
somewhere, could we not evade all this ghostliness? And will you come
with me?"

"Distance would not banish her," my sister confidently asserted. And
then she said, softly: "Have you thought what a lonely, awesome thing it
must be to be so newly dead? Pity her, Allan. We who are warm and alive
should pity her. She loves you still,--that is the meaning of it all,
you know--and she wants us to understand that for that reason we must
keep apart. Oh, it was so plain in her white face as she stood there.
And you did not see her?"

"It was your face that I saw," Allan solemnly told her--oh, how
different he had grown from the Allan that I had known!--"and yours is
the only face that I shall ever see." And again he drew her to him.

She sprang from him. "You are defying her, Allan!" she cried. "And you
must not. It is her right to keep us apart, if she wishes. It must be as
she insists. I shall go, as I told you. And, Allan, I beg of you, leave
me the courage to do as she demands!"

They stood facing each other in the deep dusk, and the wounds that I had
dealt them gaped red and accusing. "We must pity her," Theresa had said.
And as I remembered that extraordinary speech, and saw the agony in her
face, and the greater agony in Allan's, there came the great irreparable
cleavage between mortality and me. In a swift, merciful flame the last
of my mortal emotions--gross and tenacious they must have been--was
consumed. My cold grasp of Allan loosened and a new unearthly love of
him bloomed in my heart.

I was now, however, in a difficulty with which my experience in the
newer state was scarcely sufficient to deal. How could I make it plain
to Allan and Theresa that I wished to bring them together, to heal the
wounds that I had made?

Pityingly, remorsefully, I lingered near them all that night and the
next day. And by that time had brought myself to the point of a great
determination. In the little time that was left, before Theresa should
be gone and Allan bereft and desolate, I saw the one way that lay open
to me to convince them of my acquiescence in their destiny.

In the deepest darkness and silence of the next night I made a greater
effort than it will ever be necessary for me to make again. When they
think of me, Allan and Theresa, I pray now that they will recall what I
did that night, and that my thousand frustrations and selfishnesses may
shrivel and be blown from their indulgent memories.

Yet the following morning, as she had planned, Theresa appeared at
breakfast dressed for her journey. Above in her room there were the
sounds of departure. They spoke little during the brief meal, but when
it was ended Allan said:

"Theresa, there is half an hour before you go. Will you come upstairs
with me? I had a dream that I must tell you of."

"Allan!" She looked at him, frightened, but went with him. "It was of
Frances you dreamed," she said, quietly, as they entered the library
together.

"Did I say it was a dream? But I was awake--thoroughly awake. I had not
been sleeping well, and I heard, twice, the striking of the clock. And
as I lay there, looking out at the stars, and thinking--thinking of you,
Theresa,--she came to me, stood there before me, in my room. It was no
sheeted specter, you understand; it was Frances, literally she. In some
inexplicable fashion I seemed to be aware that she wanted to make me
know something, and I waited, watching her face. After a few moments it
came. She did not speak, precisely. That is, I am sure I heard no sound.
Yet the words that came from her were definite enough. She said: 'Don't
let Theresa leave you. Take her and keep her.' Then she went away. Was
that a dream?"

"I had not meant to tell you," Theresa eagerly answered, "but now I
must. It is too wonderful. What time did your clock strike, Allan?"

"One, the last time."

"Yes; it was then that I awoke. And she had been with me. I had not seen
her, but her arm had been about me and her kiss was on my cheek. Oh. I
knew; it was unmistakable. And the sound of her voice was with me."

"Then she bade you, too----"

"Yes, to stay with you. I am glad we told each other." She smiled
tearfully and began to fasten her wrap.

"But you are not going--_now!_" Allan cried. "You know that you cannot,
now that she has asked you to stay."

"Then you believe, as I do, that it was she?" Theresa demanded.

"I can never understand, but I know," he answered her. "And now you will
not go?"

       *       *       *       *       *

I am freed. There will be no further semblance of me in my old home, no
sound of my voice, no dimmest echo of my earthly self. They have no
further need of me, the two that I have brought together. Theirs is the
fullest joy that the dwellers in the shell of sense can know. Mine is
the transcendent joy of the unseen spaces.



The Woman at Seven Brothers

BY WILBUR DANIEL STEELE

     From _Land's End_, by Wilbur Daniel Steele. Copyright, 1908, by
     Harper and Brothers. By permission of the publishers and Wilbur
     Daniel Steele.


I tell you sir, I was innocent. I didn't know any more about the world
at twenty-two than some do at twelve. My uncle and aunt in Duxbury
brought me up strict; I studied hard in high school, I worked hard after
hours, and I went to church twice on Sundays, and I can't see it's right
to put me in a place like this, with crazy people. Oh yes, I know
they're crazy--you can't tell _me._ As for what they said in court about
finding her with her husband, that's the Inspector's lie, sir, because
he's down on me, and wants to make it look like my fault.

No, sir, I can't say as I thought she was handsome--not at first. For
one thing, her lips were too thin and white, and her color was bad. I'll
tell you a fact, sir; that first day I came off to the Light I was
sitting on my cot in the store-room (that's where the assistant keeper
sleeps at the Seven Brothers), as lonesome as I could be, away from home
for the first time, and the water all around me, and, even though it
was a calm day, pounding enough on the ledge to send a kind of a
_woom-woom-woom_ whining up through all that solid rock of the tower.
And when old Fedderson poked his head down from the living-room with the
sunshine above making a kind of bright frame around his hair and
whiskers, to give me a cheery, "Make yourself to home, son!" I remember
I said to myself: "_He's_ all right. I'll get along with _him_. But his
wife's enough to sour milk." That was queer, because she was so much
under him in age--'long about twenty-eight or so, and him nearer fifty.
But that's what I said, sir.

Of course that feeling wore off, same as any feeling will wear off
sooner or later in a place like the Seven Brothers. Cooped up in a place
like that you come to know folks so well that you forget what they _do_
look like. There was a long time I never noticed her, any more than
you'd notice the cat. We used to sit of an evening around the table, as
if you were Fedderson there, and me here, and her somewhere back there,
in the rocker, knitting. Fedderson would be working on his
Jacob's-ladder, and I'd be reading. He'd been working on that
Jacob's-ladder a year, I guess, and every time the Inspector came off
with the tender he was so astonished to see how good that ladder was
that the old man would go to work and make it better. That's all he
lived for.

If I was reading, as I say, I daren't take my eyes off the book, or
Fedderson had me. And then he'd begin--what the Inspector said about
him. How surprised the member of the board had been, that time, to see
everything so clean about the light. What the Inspector had said about
Fedderson's being stuck here in a second-class light--best keeper on the
coast. And so on and so on, till either he or I had to go aloft and have
a look at the wicks.

He'd been there twenty-three years, all told, and he'd got used to the
feeling that he was kept down unfair--so used to it, I guess, that he
fed on it, and told himself how folks ashore would talk when he was dead
and gone--best keeper on the coast--kept down unfair. Not that he said
that to me. No, he was far too loyal and humble and respectful, doing
his duty without complaint, as anybody could see.

And all that time, night after night, hardly ever a word out of the
woman. As I remember it, she seemed more like a piece of furniture than
anything else--not even a very good cook, nor over and above tidy. One
day, when he and I were trimming the lamp, he passed the remark that his
_first_ wife used to dust the lens and take a pride in it. Not that he
said a word against Anna, though. He never said a word against any
living mortal; he was too upright.

I don't know how it came about; or, rather, I _do_ know, but it was so
sudden, and so far away from my thoughts, that it shocked me, like the
world turned over. It was at prayers. That night I remember Fedderson
was uncommon long-winded. We'd had a batch of newspapers out by the
tender, and at such times the old man always made a long watch of it,
getting the world straightened out. For one thing, the United States
minister to Turkey was dead. Well, from him and his soul, Fedderson got
on to Turkey and the Presbyterian college there, and from that to
heathen in general. He rambled on and on, like the surf on the ledge,
_woom-woom-woom_, never coming to an end.

You know how you'll be at prayers sometimes. My mind strayed. I counted
the canes in the chair-seat where I was kneeling; I plaited a corner of
the table-cloth between my fingers for a spell, and by and by my eyes
went wandering up the back of the chair.

The woman, sir, was looking at me. Her chair was back to mine, close,
and both our heads were down in the shadow under the edge of the table,
with Fedderson clear over on the other side by the stove. And there were
her two eyes hunting mine between the spindles in the shadow. You won't
believe me, sir, but I tell you I felt like jumping to my feet and
running out of the room--it was so queer.

I don't know what her husband was praying about after that. His voice
didn't mean anything, no more than the seas on the ledge away down
there. I went to work to count the canes in the seat again, but all my
eyes were in the top of my head. It got so I couldn't stand it. We were
at the Lord's prayer, saying it singsong together, when I had to look up
again. And there her two eyes were, between the spindles, hunting mine.
Just then all of us were saying, "Forgive us our trespasses--" I thought
of it afterward.

When we got up she was turned the other way, but I couldn't help seeing
her cheeks were red. It was terrible. I wondered if Fedderson would
notice, though I might have known he wouldn't--not him. He was in too
much of a hurry to get at his Jacob's-ladder, and then he had to tell me
for the tenth time what the Inspector'd said that day about getting him
another light--Kingdom Come, maybe, he said.

I made some excuse or other and got away. Once in the store-room, I sat
down on my cot and stayed there a long time, feeling queerer than
anything. I read a chapter in the Bible, I don't know why. After I'd got
my boots off I sat with them in my hands for as much as an hour, I
guess, staring at the oil-tank and its lopsided shadow on the wall. I
tell you, sir, I was shocked. I was only twenty-two remember, and I was
shocked and horrified.

And when I did turn in, finally, I didn't sleep at all well. Two or
three times I came to, sitting straight up in bed. Once I got up and
opened the outer door to have a look. The water was like glass, dim,
without a breath of wind, and the moon just going down. Over on the
black shore I made out two lights in a village, like a pair of eyes
watching. Lonely? My, yes! Lonely and nervous. I had a horror of her,
sir. The dinghy-boat hung on its davits just there in front of the door,
and for a minute I had an awful hankering to climb into it, lower away,
and row off, no matter where. It sounds foolish.

Well, it seemed foolish next morning, with the sun shining and
everything as usual--Fedderson sucking his pen and wagging his head over
his eternal "log," and his wife down in the rocker with her head in the
newspaper, and her breakfast work still waiting. I guess that jarred it
out of me more than anything else--sight of her slouched down there,
with her stringy, yellow hair and her dusty apron and the pale back of
her neck, reading the Society Notes. _Society Notes_! Think of it! For
the first time since I came to Seven Brothers I wanted to laugh.

I guess I did laugh when I went aloft to clean the lamp and found
everything so free and breezy, gulls flying high and little whitecaps
making under a westerly. It was like feeling a big load dropped off your
shoulders. Fedderson came up with his dust-rag and cocked his head at
me.

"What's the matter, Ray?" said he.

"Nothing," said I. And then I couldn't help it. "Seems kind of out of
place for society notes," said I, "out here at Seven Brothers."

He was the other side of the lens, and when he looked at me he had a
thousand eyes, all sober. For a minute I thought he was going on
dusting, but then he came out and sat down on a sill.

"Sometimes," said he, "I get to thinking it may be a mite dull for her
out here. She's pretty young, Ray. Not much more'n a girl, hardly."

"Not much more'n a _girl!_" It gave me a turn, sir, as though I'd seen
my aunt in short dresses.

"It's a good home for her, though," he went on slow. "I've seen a lot
worse ashore, Ray. Of course if I could get a shore light----"

"Kingdom Come's a shore light."

He looked at me out of his deep-set eyes, and then he turned them around
the light-room, where he'd been so long.

"No," said he, wagging his head. "It ain't for such as me."

I never saw so humble a man.

"But look here," he went on, more cheerful. "As I was telling her just
now, a month from yesterday's our fourth anniversary, and I'm going to
take her ashore for the day and give her a holiday--new hat and
everything. A girl wants a mite of excitement now and then, Ray."

There it was again, that "girl." It gave me the fidgets, sir. I had to
do something about it. It's close quarters for last names in a light,
and I'd taken to calling him Uncle Matt soon after I came. Now, when I
was at table that noon I spoke over to where she was standing by the
stove, getting him another help of chowder.

"I guess I'll have some, too, _Aunt_ Anna," said I, matter of fact.

She never said a word nor gave a sign--just stood there kind of
round-shouldered, dipping the chowder. And that night at prayers I
hitched my chair around the table, with its back the other way.

You get awful lazy in a lighthouse, some ways. No matter how much
tinkering you've got, there's still a lot of time and there's such
a thing as too much reading. The changes in weather get monotonous,
too, by and by; the light burns the same on a thick night as it
does on a fair one. Of course there's the ships, north-bound,
south-bound--wind-jammers, freighters, passenger-boats full of
people. In the watches at night you can see their lights go by, and
wonder what they are, how they're laden, where they'll fetch up,
and all. I used to do that almost every evening when it was my first
watch, sitting out on the walk-around up there with my legs hanging
over the edge and my chin propped on the railing--lazy. The Boston
boat was the prettiest to see, with her three tiers of port-holes
lit, like a string of pearls wrapped round and round a woman's
neck--well away, too, for the ledge must have made a couple of
hundred fathoms off the Light, like a white dog-tooth of a breaker,
even on the darkest night.

Well, I was lolling there one night, as I say, watching the Boston boat
go by, not thinking of anything special, when I heard the door on the
other side of the tower open and footsteps coming around to me.

By and by I nodded toward the boat and passed the remark that she was
fetching in uncommon close to-night. No answer. I made nothing of that,
for oftentimes Fedderson wouldn't answer, and after I'd watched the
lights crawling on through the dark a spell, just to make conversation I
said I guessed there'd be a bit of weather before long.

"I've noticed," said I, "when there's weather coming on, and the wind in
the northeast, you can hear the orchestra playing aboard of her just
over there. I make it out now. Do you?"

"Yes. Oh--yes--! _I hear it all right!_"

You can imagine I started. It wasn't him, but _her_.
And there was something in the way she said that speech,
sir--something--well--unnatural. Like a hungry animal snapping
at a person's hand.

I turned and looked at her sidewise. She was standing by the railing,
leaning a little outward, the top of her from the waist picked out
bright by the lens behind her. I didn't know what in the world to say,
and yet I had a feeling I ought not to sit there mum.

"I wonder," said I, "what that captain's thinking of, fetching in so
handy to-night. It's no way. I tell you, if 'twasn't for this light,
she'd go to work and pile up on the ledge some thick night----"

She turned at that and stared straight into the lens. I didn't like the
look of her face. Somehow, with its edges cut hard all around and its
two eyes closed down to slits, like a cat's, it made a kind of mask.

"And then," I went on, uneasy enough--"and then where'd all their music
be of a sudden, and their goings-on and their singing----"

"And dancing!" She clipped me off so quick it took my breath.

"D-d-dancing?" said I.

"That's dance-music," said she. She was looking at the boat again.

"How do you know?" I felt I had to keep on talking.

Well, sir--she laughed. I looked at her. She had on a shawl of some
stuff or other that shined in the light; she had it pulled tight around
her with her two hands in front at her breast, and I saw her shoulders
swaying in tune.

"How do I _know_?" she cried. Then she laughed again, the same kind of a
laugh. It was queer, sir, to see her, and to hear her. She turned, as
quick as that, and leaned toward me. "Don't you know how to dance, Ray?"
said she.

"N-no," I managed, and I was going to say "_Aunt Anna_," but the thing
choked in my throat.

I tell you she was looking square at me all the time with her two eyes
and moving with the music as if she didn't know it. By heavens, sir, it
came over me of a sudden that she wasn't so bad-looking, after all. I
guess I must have sounded like a fool.

"You--you see," said I, "she's cleared the rip there now, and the
music's gone. You--you hear?"

"Yes," said she, turning back slow. "That's where it stops every
night--night after night--it stops just there--at the rip."

When she spoke again her voice was different. I never heard the like of
it, thin and taut as a thread. It made me shiver, sir.

"I hate 'em!" That's what she said. "I hate 'em all. I'd like to see 'em
dead. I'd love to see 'em torn apart on the rocks, night after night. I
could bathe my hands in their blood, night after night."

And do you know, sir, I saw it with my own eyes, her hands moving in
each other above the rail. But it was her voice, though. I didn't know
what to do, or what to say, so I poked my head through the railing and
looked down at the water. I don't think I'm a coward, sir, but it was
like a cold--ice-cold--hand, taking hold of my beating heart.

When I looked up finally, she was gone. By and by I went in and had a
look at the lamp, hardly knowing what I was about. Then, seeing by my
watch it was time for the old man to come on duty, I started to go
below. In the Seven Brothers, you understand, the stair goes down in a
spiral through a well against the south wall and first there's the door
to the keeper's room and then you come to another, and that's the
living-room, and then down to the store-room. And at night, if you don't
carry a lantern, it's as black as the pit.

Well, down I went, sliding my hand along the rail, and as usual I
stopped to give a rap on the keeper's door, in case he was taking a nap
after supper. Sometimes he did.

I stood there, blind as a bat, with my mind still up on the walk-around.
There was no answer to my knock. I hadn't expected any. Just from habit,
and with my right foot already hanging down for the next step, I reached
out to give the door one more tap for luck.

Do you know, sir, my hand didn't fetch up on anything. The door had been
there a second before, and now the door wasn't there. My hand just went
on going through the dark, on and on, and I didn't seem to have sense or
power enough to stop it. There didn't seem any air in the well to
breathe, and my ears were drumming to the surf--that's how scared I was.
And then my hand touched the flesh of a face, and something in the dark
said, "Oh!" no louder than a sigh.

Next thing I knew, sir, I was down in the living-room, warm and
yellow-lit, with Fedderson cocking his head at me across the table,
where he was at that eternal Jacob's-ladder of his.

"What's the matter, Ray?" said he. "Lord's sake, Ray!"

"Nothing," said I. Then I think I told him I was sick. That night I
wrote a letter to A.L. Peters, the grain-dealer in Duxbury, asking for a
job--even though it wouldn't go ashore for a couple of weeks, just the
writing of it made me feel better.

It's hard to tell you how those two weeks went by. I don't know why, but
I felt like hiding in a corner all the time. I had to come to meals, but
I didn't look at her, though, not once, unless it was by accident.
Fedderson thought I was still ailing and nagged me to death with advice
and so on. One thing I took care not to do, I can tell you, and that was
to knock on his door till I'd made certain he wasn't below in the
living-room--though I was tempted to.

Yes, sir; that's a queer thing, and I wouldn't tell you if I hadn't set
out to give you the truth. Night after night, stopping there on the
landing in that black pit, the air gone out of my lungs and the surf
drumming in my ears and sweat standing cold on my neck--and one hand
lifting up in the air--God forgive me, sir! Maybe I did wrong not to
look at her more, drooping about her work in her gingham apron, with her
hair stringing.

When the Inspector came off with the tender, that time, I told him I
was through. That's when he took the dislike to me, I guess, for he
looked at me kind of sneering and said, soft as I was, I'd have to put
up with it till next relief. And then, said he, there'd be a whole
house-cleaning at Seven Brothers, because he'd gotten Fedderson the
berth at Kingdom Come. And with that he slapped the old man on the back.

I wish you could have seen Fedderson, sir. He sat down on my cot as if
his knees had given 'way. Happy? You'd think he'd be happy, with all his
dreams come true. Yes, he was happy, beaming all over--for a minute.
Then, sir, he began to shrivel up. It was like seeing a man cut down in
his prime before your eyes. He began to wag his head.

"No," said he. "No, no; it's not for such as me. I'm good enough for
Seven Brothers, and that's all, Mr. Bayliss. That's all."

And for all the Inspector could say, that's what he stuck to. He'd
figured himself a martyr so many years, nursed that injustice like a
mother with her first-born, sir; and now in his old age, so to speak,
they weren't to rob him of it. Fedderson was going to wear out his life
in a second-class light, and folks would talk--that was his idea. I
heard him hailing down as the tender was casting off:

"See you to-morrow, Mr. Bayliss. Yep. Coming ashore with the wife for a
spree. Anniversary. Yep."

But he didn't sound much like a spree. They _had_, robbed him, partly,
after all. I wondered what _she_ thought about it. I didn't know till
night. She didn't show up to supper, which Fedderson and I got
ourselves--had a headache, be said. It was my early watch. I went and
lit up and came back to read a spell. He was finishing off the
Jacob's-ladder, and thoughtful, like a man that's lost a treasure. Once
or twice I caught him looking about the room on the sly. It was
pathetic, sir.

Going up the second time, I stepped out on the walk-around to have a
look at things. She was there on the seaward side, wrapped in that silky
thing. A fair sea was running across the ledge and it was coming on a
little thick--not too thick. Off to the right the Boston boat was
blowing, _whroom-whroom!_ Creeping up on us, quarter-speed. There was
another fellow behind her, and a fisherman's conch farther offshore.

I don't know why, but I stopped beside her and leaned on the rail. She
didn't appear to notice me, one way or another. We stood and we stood,
listening to the whistles, and the longer we stood the more it got on my
nerves, her not noticing me. I suppose she'd been too much on my mind
lately. I began to be put out. I scraped my feet. I coughed. By and by I
said out loud:

"Look here, I guess I better get out the fog-horn and give those fellows
a toot."

"Why?" said she, without moving her head--calm as that.

"_Why?_" It gave me a turn, sir. For a minute I stared at her. "Why?
Because if she don't pick up this light before very many minutes she'll
be too close in to wear--tide'll have her on the rocks--that's why!"

I couldn't see her face, but I could see one of her silk shoulders lift
a little, like a shrug. And there I kept on staring at her, a dumb one,
sure enough. I know what brought me to was hearing the Boston boat's
three sharp toots as she picked up the light--mad as anything--and swung
her helm a-port. I turned away from her, sweat stringing down my face,
and walked around to the door. It was just as well, too, for the
feed-pipe was plugged in the lamp and the wicks were popping. She'd have
been out in another five minutes, sir.

When I'd finished, I saw that woman standing in the doorway. Her eyes
were bright. I had a horror of her, sir, a living horror.

"If only the light had been out," said she, low and sweet.

"God forgive you," said I. "You don't know what you're saying."

She went down the stair into the well, winding out of sight, and as long
as I could see her, her eyes were watching mine. When I went, myself,
after a few minutes, she was waiting for me on that first landing,
standing still in the dark. She took hold of my hand, though I tried to
get it away.

"Good-by," said she in my ear.

"Good-by?" said I. I didn't understand.

"You heard what he said to-day--about Kingdom Come? Be it so--on his own
head. I'll never come back here. Once I set foot ashore--I've got
friends in Brightonboro, Ray."

I got away from her and started on down. But I stopped. "Brightonboro?"
I whispered back. "Why do you tell _me_?" My throat was raw to the
words, like a sore.

"So you'd know," said she.

Well, sir, I saw them off next morning, down that new Jacob's-ladder
into the dinghy-boat, her in a dress of blue velvet and him in his best
cutaway and derby--rowing away, smaller and smaller, the two of them.
And then I went back and sat on my cot, leaving the door open and the
ladder still hanging down the wall, along with the boat-falls.

I don't know whether it was relief, or what. I suppose I must have been
worked up even more than I'd thought those past weeks, for now it was
all over I was like a rag. I got down on my knees, sir, and prayed to
God for the salvation of my soul, and when I got up and climbed to the
living-room it was half past twelve by the clock. There was rain on the
windows and the sea was running blue-black under the sun. I'd sat there
all that time not knowing there was a squall.

It was funny; the glass stood high, but those black squalls kept coming
and going all afternoon, while I was at work up in the light-room. And I
worked hard, to keep myself busy. First thing I knew it was five, and no
sign of the boat yet. It began to get dim and kind of purplish-gray over
the land. The sun was down. I lit up, made everything snug, and got out
the night-glasses to have another look for that boat. He'd said he
intended to get back before five. No sign. And then, standing there, it
came over me that of course he wouldn't be coming off--he'd be hunting
_her_, poor old fool. It looked like I had to stand two men's watches
that night.

Never mind. I felt like myself again, even if I hadn't had any dinner or
supper. Pride came to me that night on the walk-around, watching the
boats go by--little boats, big boats, the Boston boat with all her
pearls and her dance-music. They couldn't see me; they didn't know who I
was; but to the last of them, they depended on _me_. They say a man must
be born again. Well, I was born again. I breathed deep in the wind.

Dawn broke hard and red as a dying coal. I put out the light and started
to go below. Born again; yes, sir. I felt so good I whistled in the
well, and when I came to the first door on the stair I reached out in
the dark to give it a rap for luck. And then, sir, the hair prickled all
over my scalp, when I found my hand just going on and on through the
air, the same as it had gone once before, and all of a sudden I wanted
to yell, because I thought I was going to touch flesh. It's funny what
their just forgetting to close their door did to me, isn't it?

Well, I reached for the latch and pulled it to with a bang and ran down
as if a ghost was after me. I got up some coffee and bread and bacon for
breakfast. I drank the coffee. But somehow I couldn't eat, all along of
that open door. The light in the room was blood. I got to thinking. I
thought how she'd talked about those men, women, and children on the
rocks, and how she'd made to bathe her hands over the rail. I almost
jumped out of my chair then; it seemed for a wink she was there beside
the stove watching me with that queer half-smile--really, I seemed to
see her for a flash across the red table-cloth in the red light of dawn.

"Look here!" said I to myself, sharp enough; and then I gave myself a
good laugh and went below. There I took a look out of the door, which
was still open, with the ladder hanging down. I made sure to see the
poor old fool come pulling around the point before very long now.

My boots were hurting a little, and, taking them off, I lay down on the
cot to rest, and somehow I went to sleep. I had horrible dreams. I saw
her again standing in that blood-red kitchen, and she seemed to be
washing her hands, and the surf on the ledge was whining up the tower,
louder and louder all the time, and what it whined was, "Night after
night--night after night." What woke me was cold water in my face.

The store-room was in gloom. That scared me at first; I thought night
had come, and remembered the light. But then I saw the gloom was of a
storm. The floor was shining wet, and the water in my face was spray,
flung up through the open door. When I ran to close it, it almost made
me dizzy to see the gray-and-white breakers marching past. The land was
gone; the sky shut down heavy overhead; there was a piece of wreckage on
the back of a swell, and the Jacob's-ladder was carried clean away. How
that sea had picked up so quick I can't think. I looked at my watch and
it wasn't four in the afternoon yet.

When I closed the door, sir, it was almost dark in the store-room. I'd
never been in the Light before in a gale of wind. I wondered why I was
shivering so, till I found it was the floor below me shivering, and the
walls and stair. Horrible crunchings and grindings ran away up the
tower, and now and then there was a great thud somewhere, like a
cannon-shot in a cave. I tell you, sir, I was alone, and I was in a
mortal fright for a minute or so. And yet I had to get myself together.
There was the light up there not tended to, and an early dark coming on
and a heavy night and all, and I had to go. And I had to pass that door.

You'll say it's foolish, sir, and maybe it _was_ foolish. Maybe it was
because I hadn't eaten. But I began thinking of that door up there the
minute I set foot on the stair, and all the way up through that howling
dark well I dreaded to pass it. I told myself I wouldn't stop. I didn't
stop. I felt the landing underfoot and I went on, four steps, five--and
then I couldn't. I turned and went back. I put out my hand and it went
on into nothing. That door, sir, was open again.

I left it be; I went on up to the light-room and set to work. It was
Bedlam there, sir, screeching Bedlam, but I took no notice. I kept my
eyes down. I trimmed those seven wicks, sir, as neat as ever they were
trimmed; I polished the brass till it shone, and I dusted the lens. It
wasn't till that was done that I let myself look back to see who it was
standing there, half out of sight in the well. It was her, sir.

"Where'd you come from?" I asked. I remember my voice was sharp.

"Up Jacob's-ladder," said she, and hers was like the syrup of flowers.

I shook my head. I was savage, sir. "The ladder's carried away."

"I cast it off," said she, with a smile.

"Then," said I, "you must have come while I was asleep." Another thought
came on me heavy as a ton of lead. "And where's _he_?" said I. "Where's
the boat?"

"He's drowned," said she, as easy as that. "And I let the boat go
adrift. You wouldn't hear me when I called."

"But look here," said I. "If you came through the store-room, why didn't
you wake me up? Tell me that!" It sounds foolish enough, me standing
like a lawyer in court, trying to prove she _couldn't_ be there.

She didn't answer for a moment. I guess she sighed, though I couldn't
hear for the gale, and her eyes grew soft, sir, so soft.

"I couldn't," said she. "You looked so peaceful--dear one."

My cheeks and neck went hot, sir, as if a warm iron was laid on them. I
didn't know what to say. I began to stammer, "What do you mean--" but
she was going back down the stair, out of sight. My God sir, and I used
not to think she was good-looking!

I started to follow her. I wanted to know what she meant. Then I said to
myself, "If I don't go--if I wait here--she'll come back." And I went to
the weather side and stood looking out of the window. Not that there was
much to see. It was growing dark, and the Seven Brothers looked like the
mane of a running horse, a great, vast, white horse running into the
wind. The air was a-welter with it. I caught one peep of a fisherman,
lying down flat trying to weather the ledge, and I said, "God help them
all to-night," and then I went hot at sound of that "God."

I was right about her, though. She was back again. I wanted her to speak
first, before I turned, but she wouldn't. I didn't hear her go out; I
didn't know what she was up to till I saw her coming outside on the
walk-around, drenched wet already. I pounded on the glass for her to
come in and not be a fool; if she heard she gave no sign of it.

There she stood, and there I stood watching her. Lord, sir--was it just
that I'd never had eyes to see? Or are there women who bloom? Her
clothes were shining on her, like a carving, and her hair was let down
like a golden curtain tossing and streaming in the gale, and there she
stood with her lips half open, drinking, and her eyes half closed,
gazing straight away over the Seven Brothers, and her shoulders swaying,
as if in tune with the wind and water and all the ruin. And when I
looked at her hands over the rail, sir, they were moving in each other
as if they bathed, and then I remembered, sir.

A cold horror took me. I knew now why she had come back again. She
wasn't a woman--she was a devil. I turned my back on her. I said to
myself: "It's time to light up. You've got to light up"--like that, over
and over, out loud. My hand was shivering so I could hardly find a
match; and when I scratched it, it only flared a second and then went
out in the back draught from the open door. She was standing in the
doorway, looking at me. It's queer, sir, but I felt like a child caught
in mischief.

"I--I--was going to light up," I managed to say, finally.

"Why?" said she. No, I can't say it as she did.

"_Why?_" said I. "_My God!_"

She came nearer, laughing, as if with pity, low, you know. "Your God?
And who is your God? What is God? What is anything on a night like
this?"

I drew back from her. All I could say anything about was the light.

"Why not the dark?" said she. "Dark is softer than
light--tenderer--dearer than light. From the dark up here, away up here
in the wind and storm, we can watch the ships go by, you and I. And you
love me so. You've loved me so long, Ray."

"I never have!" I struck out at her. "I don't! I don't!"

Her voice was lower than ever, but there was the same laughing pity in
it. "Oh yes, you have." And she was near me again.

"I have?" I yelled. "I'll show you! I'll show you if I have!"

I got another match, sir, and scratched it on the brass. I gave it to
the first wick, the little wick that's inside all the others. It bloomed
like a yellow flower. "I _have_?" I yelled, and gave it to the next.

Then there was a shadow, and I saw she was leaning beside me, her two
elbows on the brass, her two arms stretched out above the wicks, her
bare forearms and wrists and hands. I gave a gasp:

"Take care! You'll burn them! For God's sake----"

She didn't move or speak. The match burned my fingers and went out, and
all I could do was stare at those arms of hers, helpless. I'd never
noticed her arms before. They were rounded and graceful and covered with
a soft down, like a breath of gold. Then I heard her speaking close to
my ear.

"Pretty arms," she said. "Pretty arms!"

I turned. Her eyes were fixed on mine. They seemed heavy, as if with
sleep, and yet between their lids they were two wells, deep and deep,
and as if they held all the things I'd ever thought or dreamed in them.
I looked away from them, at her lips. Her lips were red as poppies,
heavy with redness. They moved, and I heard them speaking:

"Poor boy, you love me so, and you want to kiss me--don't you?"

"No," said I. But I couldn't turn around. I looked at her hair. I'd
always thought it was stringy hair. Some hair curls naturally with damp,
they say, and perhaps that was it, for there were pearls of wet on it,
and it was thick and shimmering around her face, making soft shadows by
the temples. There was green in it, queer strands of green like braids.

"What is it?" said I.

"Nothing but weed," said she, with that slow, sleepy smile.

Somehow or other I felt calmer than I had any time. "Look here," said I.
"I'm going to light this lamp." I took out a match, scratched it, and
touched the third wick. The flame ran around, bigger than the other two
together. But still her arms hung there. I bit my lip. "By God, I will!"
said I to myself, and I lit the fourth.

It was fierce, sir, fierce! And yet those arms never trembled. I had to
look around at her. Her eyes were still looking into mine, so deep and
deep, and her red lips were still smiling with that queer, sleepy droop;
the only thing was that tears were raining down her cheeks--big, glowing
round, jewel tears. It wasn't human, sir. It was like a dream.

"Pretty arms," she sighed, and then, as if those words had broken
something in her heart, there came a great sob bursting from her lips.
To hear it drove me mad. I reached to drag her away, but she was too
quick, sir; she cringed from me and slipped out from between my hands.
It was like she faded away, sir, and went down in a bundle, nursing her
poor arms and mourning over them with those terrible, broken sobs.

The sound of them took the manhood out of me--you'd have been the same,
sir. I knelt down beside her on the floor and covered my face.

"Please!" I moaned. "Please! Please!" That's all I could say. I wanted
her to forgive me. I reached out a hand, blind, for forgiveness, and I
couldn't find her anywhere. I had hurt her so, and she was afraid of
me, of _me_, sir, who loved her so deep it drove me crazy.

I could see her down the stair, though it was dim and my eyes were
filled with tears. I stumbled after her, crying, "Please! Please!" The
little wicks I'd lit were blowing in the wind from the door and smoking
the glass beside them black. One went out. I pleaded with them, the same
as I would plead with a human being. I said I'd be back in a second. I
promised. And I went on down the stair, crying like a baby because I'd
hurt her, and she was afraid of me--of _me_, sir.

She had gone into her room. The door was closed against me and I could
hear her sobbing beyond it, broken-hearted. My heart was broken too. I
beat on the door with my palms. I begged her to forgive me. I told her I
loved her. And all the answer was that sobbing in the dark.

And then I lifted the latch and went in, groping, pleading.
"Dearest--please! Because I love you!"

I heard her speak down near the floor. There wasn't any anger in her
voice; nothing but sadness and despair.

"No," said she. "You don't love me, Ray. You never have."

"I do! I have!"

"No, no," said she, as if she was tired out.

"Where are you?" I was groping for her. I thought, and lit a match. She
had got to the door and was standing there as if ready to fly. I went
toward her, and she made me stop. She took my breath away. "I hurt your
arms," said I, in a dream.

"No," said she, hardly moving her lips. She held them out to the match's
light for me to look and there was never a scar on them--not even that
soft, golden down was singed, sir. "You can't hurt my body," said she,
sad as anything. "Only my heart, Ray; my poor heart."

I tell you again, she took my breath away. I lit another match. "How can
you be so beautiful?" I wondered.

She answered in riddles--but oh, the sadness of her, sir.

"Because," said she, "I've always so wanted to be."

"How come your eyes so heavy?" said I.

"Because I've seen so many things I never dreamed of," said she.

"How come your hair so thick?"

"It's the seaweed makes it thick," said she smiling queer, queer.

"How come seaweed there?"

"Out of the bottom of the sea."

She talked in riddles, but it was like poetry to hear her, or a song.

"How come your lips so red?" said I.

"Because they've wanted so long to be kissed."

Fire was on me, sir. I reached out to catch her, but she was gone, out
of the door and down the stair. I followed, stumbling. I must have
tripped on the turn, for I remember going through the air and fetching
up with a crash, and I didn't know anything for a spell--how long I
can't say. When I came to, she was there, somewhere, bending over me,
crooning, "My love--my love--" under her breath like, a song.

But then when I got up, she was not where my arms went; she was down the
stair again, just ahead of me. I followed her. I was tottering and dizzy
and full of pain. I tried to catch up with her in the dark of the
store-room, but she was too quick for me, sir, always a little too quick
for me. Oh, she was cruel to me, sir. I kept bumping against things,
hurting myself still worse, and it was cold and wet and a horrible noise
all the while, sir; and then, sir, I found the door was open, and a sea
had parted the hinges.

I don't know how it all went, sir. I'd tell you if I could, but it's all
so blurred--sometimes it seems more like a dream. I couldn't find her
any more; I couldn't hear her; I went all over, everywhere. Once, I
remember, I found myself hanging out of that door between the davits,
looking down into those big black seas and crying like a baby. It's all
riddles and blur. I can't seem to tell you much, sir. It was all--all--I
don't know.

I was talking to somebody else--not her. It was the Inspector. I hardly
knew it was the Inspector. His face was as gray as a blanket, and his
eyes were bloodshot, and his lips were twisted. His left wrist hung
down, awkward. It was broken coming aboard the Light in that sea. Yes,
we were in the living-room. Yes, sir, it was daylight--gray daylight. I
tell you, sir, the man looked crazy to me. He was waving his good arm
toward the weather windows, and what he was saying, over and over, was
this:

"_Look what you done, damn you! Look what you done_!"

And what I was saying was this:

"_I've lost her_!"

I didn't pay any attention to him, nor him to me. By and by he did,
though. He stopped his talking all of a sudden, and his eyes looked like
the devil's eyes. He put them up close to mine. He grabbed my arm with
his good hand, and I cried, I was so weak.

"Johnson," said he, "is that it? By the living God--if you got a woman
out here, Johnson!"

"No," said I. "I've lost her."

"What do you mean--lost her?"

"It was dark," said I--and it's funny how my head was clearing up--"and
the door was open--the store-room door--and I was after her--and I guess
she stumbled, maybe--and I lost her."

"Johnson," said he, "what do you mean? You sound crazy--downright crazy.
Who?"

"Her," said I. "Fedderson's wife."

"_Who?_"

"Her," said I. And with that he gave my arm another jerk.

"Listen," said he, like a tiger. "Don't try that on me. It won't do any
good--that kind of lies--not where _you're_ going to. Fedderson and his
wife, too--the both of 'em's drowned deader 'n a door-nail."

"I know," said I, nodding my head. I was so calm it made him wild.

"You're crazy! Crazy as a loon, Johnson!" And he was chewing his lip
red. "I know, because it was me that found the old man laying on Back
Water Flats yesterday morning--_me!_ And she'd been with him in the
boat, too, because he had a piece of her jacket tore off, tangled in his
arm."

"I know," said I, nodding again, like that.

"You know _what_, you _crazy, murdering fool_?" Those were his words to
me, sir.

"I know," said I, "what I know."

"And _I_ know," said he, "what _I_ know."

And there you are, sir. He's Inspector. I'm--nobody.



At the Gate

BY MYLA JO CLOSSER

     From the _Century Magazine_. By permission of the Century Company
     and Myla J. Closser.


A shaggy Airedale scented his way along the highroad. He had not been
there before, but he was guided by the trail of his brethren who had
preceded him. He had gone unwillingly upon this journey, yet with the
perfect training of dogs he had accepted it without complaint. The path
had been lonely, and his heart would have failed him, traveling as he
must without his people, had not these traces of countless dogs before
him promised companionship of a sort at the end of the road.

The landscape had appeared arid at first, for the translation from
recent agony into freedom from pain had been so numbing in its swiftness
that it was some time before he could fully appreciate the pleasant
dog-country through which he was passing. There were woods with leaves
upon the ground through which to scurry, long grassy slopes for extended
runs, and lakes into which he might plunge for sticks and bring them
back to--But he did not complete his thought, for the boy was not with
him. A little wave of homesickness possessed him.

It made his mind easier to see far ahead a great gate as high as the
heavens, wide enough for all. He understood that only man built such
barriers and by straining his eyes he fancied he could discern humans
passing through to whatever lay beyond. He broke into a run that he
might the more quickly gain this inclosure made beautiful by men and
women; but his thoughts outran his pace, and he remembered that he had
left the family behind, and again this lovely new compound became not
perfect, since it would lack the family.

The scent of the dogs grew very strong now, and coming nearer, he
discovered, to his astonishment that of the myriads of those who had
arrived ahead of him thousands were still gathered on the outside of the
portal. They sat in a wide circle spreading out on each side of the
entrance, big, little, curly, handsome, mongrel, thoroughbred dogs of
every age, complexion, and personality. All were apparently waiting for
something, someone, and at the pad of the Airedale's feet on the hard
road they arose and looked in his direction.

That the interest passed as soon as they discovered the new-comer to be
a dog puzzled him. In his former dwelling-place a four-footed brother
was greeted with enthusiasm when he was a friend, with suspicious
diplomacy when a stranger, and with sharp reproof when an enemy; but
never had he been utterly ignored.

He remembered something that he had read many times on great buildings
with lofty entrances. "Dogs not admitted," the signs had said, and he
feared this might be the reason for the waiting circle outside the gate.
It might be that this noble portal stood as the dividing-line between
mere dogs and humans. But he had been a member of the family, romping
with them in the living-room, sitting at meals with them in the
dining-room, going upstairs at night with them, and the thought that he
was to be "kept out" would be unendurable.

He despised the passive dogs. They should be treating a barrier after
the fashion of their old country, leaping against it, barking, and
scratching the nicely painted door. He bounded up the last little hill
to set them an example, for he was still full of the rebellion of the
world; but he found no door to leap against. He could see beyond the
entrance dear masses of people, yet no dog crossed the threshold. They
continued in their patient ring, their gaze upon the winding road.

He now advanced cautiously to examine the gate. It occurred to him that
it must be fly-time in this region, and he did not wish to make himself
ridiculous before all these strangers by trying to bolt through an
invisible mesh like the one that had baffled him when he was a little
chap. Yet there were no screens, and despair entered his soul. What
bitter punishment these poor beasts must have suffered before they
learned to stay on this side the arch that led to human beings! What
had they done on earth to merit this? Stolen bones troubled his
conscience, runaway days, sleeping in the best chair until the key
clicked in the lock. These were sins.

At that moment an English bull-terrier, white, with liver-colored spots
and a jaunty manner, approached him, snuffling in a friendly way. No
sooner had the bull-terrier smelt his collar than he fell to expressing
his joy at meeting him. The Airedale's reserve was quite thawed by this
welcome, though he did not know just what to make of it.

"I know you! I know you!" exclaimed the bull-terrier, adding
inconsequently, "What's your name?"

"Tam o'Shanter. They call me Tammy," was the answer, with a pardonable
break in the voice.

"I know them," said the bull-terrier. "Nice folks."

"Best ever," said the Airedale, trying to be nonchalant, and scratching
a flea which was not there. "I don't remember you. When did you know
them?"

"About fourteen tags ago, when they were first married. We keep track of
time here by the license-tags. I had four."

"This is my first and only one. You were before my time, I guess." He
felt young and shy.

"Come for a walk, and tell me all about them," was his new friend's
invitation.

"Aren't we allowed in there?" asked Tam, looking toward the gate.

"Sure. You can go in whenever you want to. Some of us do at first, but
we don't stay."

"Like it better outside?"

"No, no; it isn't that."

"Then why are all you fellows hanging around here? Any old dog can see
it's better beyond the arch."

"You see, we're waiting for our folks to come."

The Airedale grasped it at once, and nodded understandingly.

"I felt that way when I came along the road. It wouldn't be what it's
supposed to be without them. It wouldn't be the perfect place."

"Not to us," said the bull-terrier.

"Fine! I've stolen bones, but it must be that I have been forgiven, if
I'm to see them here again. It's the great good place all right. But
look here," he added as a new thought struck him, "do they wait for us?"

The older inhabitant coughed in slight embarrassment.

"The humans couldn't do that very well. It wouldn't be the thing to have
them hang around outside for just a dog--not dignified."

"Quite right," agreed Tam. "I'm glad they go straight to their mansions.
I'd--I'd hate to have them missing me as I am missing them." He sighed.
"But, then, they wouldn't have to wait so long."

"Oh, well, they're getting on. Don't be discouraged," comforted the
terrier. "And in the meantime it's like a big hotel in summer--watching
the new arrivals. See, there is something doing now."

All the dogs were aroused to excitement by a little figure making its
way uncertainly up the last slope. Half of them started to meet it,
crowding about in a loving, eager pack.

"Look out; don't scare it," cautioned the older animals, while word was
passed to those farthest from the gate: "Quick! Quick! A baby's come!"

Before they had entirely assembled, however, a gaunt yellow hound pushed
through the crowd, gave one sniff at the small child, and with a yelp of
joy crouched at its feet. The baby embraced the hound in recognition,
and the two moved toward the gate. Just outside the hound stopped to
speak to an aristocratic St. Bernard who had been friendly:

"Sorry to leave you, old fellow," he said, "but I'm going in to watch
over the kid. You see, I'm all she has up here."

The bull-terrier looked at the Airedale for appreciation.

"That's the way we do it," he said proudly.

"Yes, but--" the Airedale put his head on one side in perplexity.

"Yes, but what?" asked the guide.

"The dogs that don't have any people--the nobodies' dogs?"

"That's the best of all. Oh, everything is thought out here. Crouch
down,--you must be tired,--and watch," said the bull-terrier.

Soon they spied another small form making the turn in the road. He wore
a Boy Scout's uniform, but he was a little fearful, for all that, so new
was this adventure. The dogs rose again and snuffled, but the better
groomed of the circle held back, and in their place a pack of odds and
ends of the company ran down to meet him. The Boy Scout was reassured by
their friendly attitude, and after petting them impartially, he chose an
old-fashioned black and tan, and the two passed in.

Tam looked questioningly.

"They didn't know each other!" he exclaimed.

"But they've always wanted to. That's one of the boys who used to beg
for a dog, but his father wouldn't let him have one. So all our strays
wait for just such little fellows to come along. Every boy gets a dog,
and every dog gets a master."

"I expect the boy's father would like to know that now," commented the
Airedale. "No doubt he thinks quite often, 'I wish I'd let him have a
dog.'"

The bull-terrier laughed.

"You're pretty near the earth yet, aren't you?"

Tam admitted it.

"I've a lot of sympathy with fathers and with boys, having them both in
the family, and a mother as well."

The bull-terrier leaped up in astonishment.

"You don't mean to say they keep a boy?"

"Sure; greatest boy on earth. Ten this year."

"Well, well, this is news! I wish they'd kept a boy when I was there."

The Airedale looked at his new friend intently.

"See here, who are you?" he demanded.

But the other hurried on:

"I used to run away from them just to play with a boy. They'd punish me,
and I always wanted to tell them it was their fault for not getting
one."

"Who are you, anyway?" repeated Tam. "Talking all this interest in me,
too. Whose dog _were_ you?"

"You've already guessed. I see it in your quivering snout. I'm the old
dog that had to leave them about ten years ago."

"Their old dog Bully?"

"Yes, I'm Bully." They nosed each other with deeper affection, then
strolled about the glades shoulder to shoulder. Bully the more eagerly
pressed for news. "Tell me, how are they getting along?"

"Very well indeed; they've paid for the house."

"I--I suppose you occupy the kennel?"

"No. They said they couldn't stand it to see another dog in your old
place."

Bully stopped to howl gently.

"That touches me. It's generous in you to tell it. To think they missed
me!"

For a little while they went on in silence, but as evening fell, and
the light from the golden streets inside of the city gave the only glow
to the scene, Bully grew nervous and suggested that they go back.

"We can't see so well at night, and I like to be pretty close to the
path, especially toward morning."

Tam assented.

"And I will point them out. You might not know them just at first."

"Oh, we know them. Sometimes the babies have so grown up they're rather
hazy in their recollection of how we look. They think we're bigger than
we are; but you can't fool us dogs."

"It's understood," Tam cunningly arranged, "that when he or she arrives
you'll sort of make them feel at home while I wait for the boy?"

"That's the best plan," assented Bully, kindly. "And if by any chance
the little fellow should come first,--there's been a lot of them this
summer--of course you'll introduce me?"

"I shall be proud to do it."

And so with muzzles sunk between their paws, and with their eyes
straining down the pilgrims' road, they wait outside the gate.




Ligeia

BY EDGAR ALLAN POE

     And the will therein lieth, which dieth not. Who knoweth the
     mystery of the will, with its vigor? For God is but a great will
     pervading all things by nature of its intentness. Man doth not
     yield himself to the angels, nor unto death utterly, save only
     through the weakness of his feeble will.--_Joseph Glanvill._


I cannot, for my soul, remember how, when, or even precisely where, I
first became acquainted with the lady Ligeia. Long years have since
elapsed, and my memory is feeble through much suffering. Or, perhaps, I
cannot _now_ bring these points to mind, because, in truth, the
character of my beloved, her rare learning, her singular yet placid cast
of beauty, and the thrilling and enthralling eloquence of her low
musical language, made their way into my heart by paces so steadily and
stealthily progressive, that they have been unnoticed and unknown. Yet I
believe that I met her first and most frequently in some large, old,
decaying city near the Rhine. Of her family--I have surely heard her
speak. That it is of a remotely ancient date cannot be doubted. Ligeia!
Ligeia! Buried in studies of a nature more than all else adapted to
deaden impressions of the outward world, it is by that sweet word
alone--by Ligeia--that I bring before mine eyes in fancy the image of
her who is no more. And now, while I write, a recollection flashes upon
me that I have _never known_ the paternal name of her who was my friend
and my bethrothed, and who became the partner of my studies, and finally
the wife of my bosom. Was it a playful charge on the part of my Ligeia?
or was it a test of my strength of affection, that I should institute no
inquiries upon this point? or was it rather a caprice of my own--a
wildly romantic offering on the shrine of the most passionate devotion?
I but indistinctly recall the fact itself--what wonder that I have
utterly forgotten the circumstances which originated or attended it?
And, indeed, if ever that spirit which is entitled _Romance_--if ever
she, the wan misty-winged _Ashtophet_ of idolatrous Egypt, presided, as
they tell, over marriages ill-omened, then most surely she presided over
mine.

There is one dear topic, however, on which my memory fails me not. It
is the _person_ of Ligeia. In stature she was tall, somewhat
slender, and, in her latter days, even emaciated. I would in vain
attempt to portray the majesty, the quiet ease of her demeanor, or the
incomprehensible lightness and elasticity of her footfall. She came
and departed as a shadow. I was never made aware of her entrance into
my closed study, save by the dear music of her low sweet voice, as she
placed her marble hand upon my shoulder. In beauty of face no maiden
ever equaled her. It was the radiance of an opium-dream--an airy and
spirit-lifting vision more wildly divine than the phantasies which
hovered about the slumbering souls of the daughters of Delos. Yet her
features were not of that regular mold which we have been falsely taught
to worship in the classical labors of the heathen. "There is no exquisite
beauty," says Bacon, Lord Verulam, speaking truly of all the forms and
_genera_ of beauty, "without some _strangeness_ in the proportion."
Yet, although I saw that the features of Ligeia were not of a classic
regularity--although I perceived that her loveliness was indeed
"exquisite," and felt that there was much of "strangeness" pervading it,
yet I have tried in vain to detect the irregularity and to trace home my
own perception of "the strange." I examined the contour of the lofty and
pale forehead--it was faultless--how cold indeed that word when applied
to a majesty so divine!--the skin rivaling the purest ivory, the
commanding extent and repose, the gentle prominence of the regions above
the temples; and then the raven-black, the glossy, the luxuriant, and
naturally-curling tresses, setting forth the full force of the Homeric
epithet, "hyacinthine!" I looked at the delicate outlines of the
nose--and nowhere but in the graceful medallions of the Hebrews had I
beheld a similar perfection. There were the same luxurious smoothness of
surface, the same scarcely perceptible tendency to the aquiline, the
same harmoniously curved nostrils speaking the free spirit. I regarded
the sweet mouth. Here was indeed the triumph of all things heavenly--the
magnificent turn of the short upper lip--the soft, voluptuous slumber of
the under--the dimples which sported, and the color which spoke--the
teeth glancing back, with a brilliancy almost startling, every ray of
the holy light which fell upon them in her serene and placid yet most
exultingly radiant of all smiles. I scrutinized the formation of the
chin--and, here, too, I found the gentleness of breadth, the softness
and the majesty, the fullness and the spirituality, of the Greek--the
contour which the god Apollo revealed but in a dream, to Cleomenes, the
son of the Athenian. And then I peered into the large eyes of Ligeia.

For eyes we have no models in the remotely antique. It might have been,
too, that in these eyes of my beloved lay the secret to which Lord
Verulam alludes. They were, I must believe, far larger than the ordinary
eyes of our own race. They were even fuller than the fullest of the
gazelle eyes of the tribe of the valley of Nourjahad. Yet it was only at
intervals--in moments of intense excitement--that this peculiarity
became more than slightly noticeable in Ligeia. And at such moments was
her beauty--in my heated fancy thus it appeared perhaps--the beauty of
beings either above or apart from the earth--the beauty of the fabulous
Houri of the Turk. The hue of the orbs was the most brilliant of black,
and, far over them, hung jetty lashes of great length. The brows,
slightly irregular in outline, had the same tint. The "strangeness,"
however, which I found in the eyes was of a nature distinct from the
formation, or the color, or the brilliancy of the features, and must,
after all, be referred to the _expression_. Ah, word of no meaning!
behind whose vast latitude of mere sound we intrench our ignorance of so
much of the spiritual. The expression of the eyes of Ligeia! How for
long hours have I pondered upon it! How have I, through the whole of a
midsummer night, struggled to fathom it! What was it--that something
more profound than the well of Democritus--which lay far within the
pupils of my beloved? What _was_ it? I was possessed with a passion to
discover. Those eyes! those large, those shining, those divine orbs!
they became to me twin stars of Leda, and I to them devoutest of
astrologers.

There is no point, among the many incomprehensible anomalies of the
science of mind, more thrillingly exciting than the fact--never, I
believe, noticed in the schools--than in our endeavors to recall to
memory something long forgotten, we often find ourselves _upon the very
verge_ of remembrance, without being able, in the end, to remember. And
thus how frequently, in my intense scrutiny of Ligeia's eyes, have I
felt approaching the full knowledge of their expression--felt it
approaching--yet not quite be mine--and so at length entirely depart!
And (strange, oh, strangest mystery of all!) I found, in the commonest
objects of the universe, a circle of analogies to that expression. I
mean to say that, subsequently to the period when Ligeia's beauty passed
into my spirit, there dwelling as in a shrine, I derived, from many
existences in the material world, a sentiment such as I felt always
around, within me, by her large and luminous orbs. Yet not the more
could I define that sentiment, or analyze, or even steadily view it. I
recognized it, let me repeat, sometimes in the survey of a rapidly
growing vine--in the contemplation of a moth, a butterfly, a chrysalis,
a stream of running water. I have felt it in the ocean--in the falling
of a meteor. I have felt it in the glances of unusually aged people. And
there are one or two stars in heaven (one especially, a star of the
sixth magnitude, double and changeable, to be found near the large star
in Lyra) in a telescopic scrutiny of which I have been made aware of the
feeling. I have been filled with it by certain sounds from stringed
instruments, and not unfrequently by passages from books. Among
innumerable other instances, I well remember something in a volume of
Joseph Glanvill, which (perhaps merely from its quaintness--who shall
say?) never failed to inspire me with the sentiment: "And the will
therein lieth, which dieth not. Who knoweth the mysteries of the will,
with its vigor? For God is but a great will pervading all things by
nature of its intentness. Man doth not yield him to the angels, nor unto
death utterly, save only through the weakness of his feeble will."

Length of years and subsequent reflection have enabled me to trace,
indeed, some remote connection between this passage in the English
moralist and a portion of the character of Ligeia. An _intensity_ in
thought, action, or speech was possibly, in her, a result, or at least
an index, of that gigantic volition which, during our long intercourse,
failed to give other and more immediate evidence of its existence. Of
all the women whom I have ever known, she, the outwardly calm, the
ever-placid Ligeia, was the most violently a prey to the tumultuous
vultures of stern passion. And of such passion I could form no estimate,
save by the miraculous expansion of those eyes which at once so
delighted and appalled me,--by the almost magical melody, modulation,
distinctness, and placidity of her very low voice,--and by the fierce
energy (rendered doubly effective by contrast with her manner of
utterance) of the wild words which she habitually uttered.

I have spoken of the learning of Ligeia: it was immense--such as I have
never known in woman. In the classical tongues was she deeply
proficient, and as far as my own acquaintance extended in regard to the
modern dialects of Europe, I have never known her at fault. Indeed upon
any theme of the most admired because simply the most abstruse of the
boasted erudition of the Academy, have I _ever_ found Ligeia at fault?
How singularly--how thrillingly, this one point in the nature of my wife
has forced itself, at this late period only, upon my attention! I said
her knowledge was such as I have never known in woman--but where
breathes the man who has traversed, and successfully, _all_ the wide
areas of moral, physical, and mathematical science? I saw not then what
I now clearly perceive that the acquisitions of Ligeia were gigantic,
were astounding; yet I was sufficiently aware of her infinite supremacy
to resign myself, with a child-like confidence, to her guidance through
the chaotic world of metaphysical investigation at which I was most
busily occupied during the earlier years of our marriage. With how vast
a triumph--with how vivid a delight--with how much of all that is
ethereal in hope did I _feel_, as she bent over me in studies but little
sought--but less known,--that delicious vista by slow degrees expanding
before me, down whose long, gorgeous, and all untrodden path, I might at
length pass onward to the goal of a wisdom too divinely precious not to
be forbidden.

How poignant, then, must have been the grief with which, after some
years, I beheld my well-grounded expectations take wings to themselves
and fly away! Without Ligeia I was but as a child groping benighted. Her
presence, her readings alone, rendered vividly luminous the many
mysteries of the transcendentalism in which we were immersed. Wanting
the radiant luster of her eyes, letters, lambent and golden, grew duller
than Saturnian lead. And now those eyes shone less and less frequently
upon the pages over which I pored. Ligeia grew ill. The wild eyes blazed
with a too--too glorious effulgence; the pale fingers became of the
transparent waxen hue of the grave; and the blue veins upon the lofty
forehead swelled and sank impetuously with the tides of the most gentle
emotion. I saw that she must die--and I struggled desperately in spirit
with the grim Azrael. And the struggles of the passionate wife were, to
my astonishment, even more energetic than my own. There had been much in
her stern nature to impress me with the belief that, to her, death would
have come without its terrors; but not so. Words are impotent to convey
any just idea of the fierceness of resistance with which she wrestled
with the Shadow. I groaned in anguish at the pitiable spectacle. I would
have soothed--I would have reasoned; but in the intensity of her wild
desire for life--for life--_but_ for life--solace and reason were alike
the uttermost of folly. Yet not until the last instance, amid the most
convulsive writhings of her fierce spirit, was shaken the external
placidity of her demeanor. Her voice grew more gentle--grew more
low--yet I would not wish to dwell upon the wild meaning of the quietly
uttered words. My brain reeled as I hearkened, entranced, to a melody
more than mortal--to assumptions and aspirations which mortality had
never before known.

That she loved me I should not have doubted; and I might have been
easily aware that, in a bosom such as hers, love would have reigned no
ordinary passion. But in death only was I fully impressed with the
strength of her affection. For long hours, detaining my hand, would she
pour out before me the overflowing of a heart whose more than passionate
devotion amounted to idolatry. How had I deserved to be so blessed by
such confessions?--how had I deserved to be so cursed with the removal
of my beloved in the hour of my making them? But upon this subject I
cannot bear to dilate. Let me say only, that in Ligeia's more than
womanly abandonment to a love, alas! all unmerited, all unworthily
bestowed, I at length, recognized the principle of her longing, with so
wildly earnest a desire, for the life which was now fleeing so rapidly
away. It is this wild longing--it is this eager vehemence of desire for
life--_but_ for life--that I have no power to portray--no utterance
capable of expressing.

At high noon of the night in which she departed, beckoning me,
peremptorily, to her side, she bade me repeat certain verses composed by
herself not many days before. I obeyed her. They were these:--

    Lo! 'tis a gala night
      Within the lonesome latter years!
    An angel throng, bewinged, bedight
      In veils, and drowned in tears,
    Sit in a theatre, to see
      A play of hopes and fears,
    While the orchestra breathes fitfully
      The music of the spheres.

    Mimes, in the form of God on high,
      Mutter and mumble low,
    And hither and thither fly;
      Mere puppets they, who come and go
    At bidding of vast formless things
      That shift the scenery to and fro,
    Flapping from out their condor wings
      Invisible Wo!

    That motley drama!--oh, be sure
      It shall not be forgot!
    With its Phantom chased for evermore
      By a crowd that seize it not,
    Through a circle that ever returneth in
      To the self-same spot;
    And much of Madness, and more of Sin
      And Horror, the soul of the plot!

    But see, amid the mimic rout,
      A crawling shape intrude!
    A blood-red thing that writhes from out
      The scenic solitude!
    It writhes!--it writhes!--with mortal pangs
      The mimes become its food,
    And the seraphs sob at vermin fangs
      In human gore imbued.

    Out--out are the lights--out all:
      And over each quivering form,
    The curtain, a funeral pall,
      Comes down with the rush of a storm--
    And the angels, all pallid and wan,
      Uprising, unveiling, affirm
    That the play is the tragedy, "Man,"
      And its hero, the conqueror Worm.

"O God!" half shrieked Ligeia, leaping to her feet and extending her
arms aloft with a spasmodic movement, as I made an end of these
lines--"O God! O Divine Father!--shall these things be undeviatingly
so?--shall this conqueror be not once conquered? Are we not part and
parcel in Thee? Who--who knoweth the mysteries of the will with its
vigor? Man doth not yield him to the angels, _nor unto death utterly_,
save only through the weakness of his feeble will."

And now, as if exhausted with emotion, she suffered her white arms to
fall, and returned solemnly to her bed of death. And as she breathed her
last sighs, there came mingled with them a low murmur from her lips. I
bent to them my ear, and distinguished, again, the concluding words of
the passage in Glanvill: "_Man doth not yield him to the angels, nor
unto death utterly, save only through the weakness of his feeble will._"

She died: and I, crushed into the very dust with sorrow, could no longer
endure the lonely desolation of my dwelling in the dim and decaying
city by the Rhine. I had no lack of what the world calls wealth. Ligeia
had brought me far more, very far more, than ordinarily falls to the lot
of mortals. After a few months, therefore, of weary and aimless
wandering, I purchased and put in some repair, an abbey, which I shall
not name, in one of the wildest and least frequented portions of fair
England. The gloomy and dreary grandeur of the building, the almost
savage aspect of the domain, the many melancholy and time-honored
memories connected with both, had much in unison with the feelings of
utter abandonment which had driven me into that remote and unsocial
region of the country. Yet although the external abbey, with its verdant
decay hanging about it, suffered but little alteration, I gave way, with
a child-like perversity, and perchance with a faint hope of alleviating
my sorrows, to a display of more than regal magnificence within. For
such follies, even in childhood, I had imbibed a taste, and now they
came back to me as if in the dotage of grief. Alas, I feel how much even
of incipient madness might have been discovered in the gorgeous and
fantastic draperies, in the solemn carvings of Egypt, in the wild
cornices and furniture, in the Bedlam patterns of the carpets of tufted
gold! I had become a bounden slave in the trammels of opium, and my
labors and my orders had taken a coloring from my dreams. But these
absurdities I must not pause to detail. Let me speak only of that one
chamber, ever accursed, whither, in a moment of mental alienation, I led
from the altar as my bride--as the successor of the unforgotten
Ligeia--the fair-haired and blue-eyed Lady Rowena Trevanion, of
Tremaine.

There is no individual portion of the architecture and decoration of
that bridal chamber which is not visibly before me. Where were the souls
of the haughty family of the bride, when, through thirst of gold, they
permitted to pass the threshold of an apartment _so_ bedecked, a maiden
and a daughter so beloved? I have said, that I minutely remember the
details of the chamber--yet I am sadly forgetful on topics of deep
moment; and here there was no system, no keeping, in the fantastic
display to take hold upon the memory. The room lay in a high turret of
the castellated abbey, was pentagonal in shape, and of capacious size.
Occupying the whole southern face of the pentagonal was the sole
window--an immense sheet of unbroken glass from Venice--a single pane,
and tinted of a leaden hue, so that the rays of either the sun or moon
passing through it, fell with a ghastly luster on the objects within.
Over the upper portion of this huge window extended the trellis-work of
an aged vine, which clambered up the massy walls of the turret. The
ceiling, of gloomy-looking oak, was excessively lofty, vaulted, and
elaborately fretted with the wildest and most grotesque specimens of a
semi-Gothic, semi-Druidical device. From out the most central recess of
this melancholy vaulting, depended, by a single chain of gold with long
links, a huge censer of the same metal, Saracenic in pattern, and with
many perforations so contrived that there writhed in and out of them, as
if endued with a serpent vitality, a continual succession of
parti-colored fires.

Some few ottomans and golden candelabra, of Eastern figure, were in
various stations about; and there was the couch, too--the bridal
couch--of an Indian model, and low, and sculptured of solid ebony, with
a pall-like canopy above. In each of the angles of the chamber stood on
end a gigantic sarcophagus of black granite, from the tombs of the kings
over against Luxor, with their aged lids full of immemorial sculpture.
But in the draping of the apartment lay, alas! the chief phantasy of
all. The lofty walls, gigantic in height--even unproportionably so--were
hung from summit to foot, in vast folds, with a heavy and
massive-looking tapestry--tapestry of a material which was found alike
as a carpet on the floor, as a covering for the ottomans and the ebony
bed, as a canopy for the bed, and as the gorgeous volutes of the
curtains which partially shaded the window. The material was the richest
cloth of gold. It was spotted all over, at irregular intervals, with
arabesque figures, about a foot in diameter, and wrought upon the cloth
in patterns of the most jetty black. But these figures partook of the
true character of the arabesque only when regarded from a single point
of view. By a contrivance now common, and indeed traceable to a very
remote period of antiquity, they were made changeable in aspect. To one
entering the room, they bore the appearance of simple monstrosities; but
upon a farther advance, this appearance gradually departed; and, step by
step, as the visitor moved his station in the chamber, he saw himself
surrounded by an endless succession of the ghastly forms which belong to
the superstition of the Norman, or arise in the guilty slumbers of the
monk. The phantasmagoric effect was vastly heightened by the artificial
introduction of a strong continual current of wind behind the
draperies--giving a hideous and uneasy animation to the whole.

In halls such as these--in a bridal chamber such as this--I passed, with
the Lady of Tremaine, the unhallowed hours of the first month of our
marriage--passed them with but little disquietude. That my wife dreaded
the fierce moodiness of my temper--that she shunned me, and loved me but
little--I could not help perceiving; but it gave me rather pleasure than
otherwise. I loathed her with a hatred belonging more to demon than to
man. My memory flew back (oh, with what intensity of regret!) to Ligeia,
the beloved, the august, the beautiful, the entombed. I reveled in
recollections of her purity, of her wisdom, of her lofty--her ethereal
nature, of her passionate, her idolatrous love. Now, then, did my spirit
fully and freely burn with more than all the fires of her own. In the
excitement of my opium dreams (for I was habitually fettered in the
shackles of the drug), I would call aloud upon her name, during the
silence of the night, or among the sheltered recesses of the glens by
day, as if, through the wild eagerness, the solemn passion, the
consuming ardor of my longing for the departed, I could restore her to
the pathways she had abandoned--ah, _could_ it be forever?--upon the
earth.

About the commencement of the second month of the marriage, the Lady
Rowena was attacked with sudden illness, from which her recovery was
slow. The fever which consumed her rendered her nights uneasy; and in
her perturbed state of half-slumber, she spoke of sounds, and of
motions, in and about the chamber of the turret, which I concluded had
no origin save in the distemper of her fancy, or perhaps in the
phantasmagoric influences of the chamber itself. She became at length
convalescent--finally, well. Yet but a second more violent disorder
again threw her upon a bed of suffering; and from this attack her frame,
at all times feeble, never altogether recovered. Her illnesses were,
after this epoch, of alarming character, and of more alarming
recurrence, defying alike the knowledge and the great exertions of her
physicians. With the increase of the chronic disease, which had thus,
apparently, taken too sure hold upon her constitution to be eradicated
by human means, I could not fail to observe a similar increase in the
nervous irritation of her temperament, and in her excitability by
trivial causes of fear. She spoke again, and now more frequently and
pertinaciously, of the sounds--of the slight sounds--and of the unusual
motions among the tapestries, to which she had formerly alluded.

One night, near the closing in of September, she pressed this
distressing subject with more than usual emphasis upon my attention. She
had just awakened from an unquiet slumber, and I had been watching, with
feelings half of anxiety, half of vague terror, the workings of her
emaciated countenance. I sat by the side of her ebony bed, upon one of
the ottomans of India. She partly arose, and spoke, in an earnest low
whisper, of sounds which she _then_ heard, but which I could not
hear--of motions which she _then_ saw, but which I could not perceive.
The wind was rushing hurriedly behind the tapestries, and I wished to
show her (what, let me confess it, I could not _all_ believe) that those
almost inarticulate breathings, and those very gentle variations of the
figures upon the wall, were but the natural effects of that customary
rushing of the wind. But a deadly pallor, overspreading her face, had
proved to me that my exertions to reassure her would be fruitless. She
appeared to be fainting, and no attendants were within call. I
remembered where was deposited a decanter of light wine which had been
ordered by her physicians, and hastened across the chamber to procure
it. But, as I stepped beneath the light of the censer, two
circumstances of a startling nature attracted my attention. I had felt
that some palpable although invisible object had passed lightly by my
person; and I saw that there lay upon the golden carpet, in the very
middle of the rich luster thrown from the censer, a shadow--a faint,
indefinite shadow of angelic aspect--such as might be fancied for the
shadow of a shade. But I was wild with the excitement of an immoderate
dose of opium, and heeded these things but little, nor spoke of them to
Rowena. Having found the wine, I recrossed the chamber, and poured out a
gobletful, which I held to the lips of the fainting lady. She had now
partially recovered, however, and took the vessel herself, while I sank
upon an ottoman near me, with my eyes fastened upon her person. It was
then that I became distinctly aware of a gentle footfall upon the
carpet, and near the couch; and in a second thereafter, as Rowena was in
the act of raising the wine to her lips, I saw, or may have dreamed that
I saw, fall within the goblet, as if from some invisible spring in the
atmosphere of the room, three or four large drops of a brilliant and
ruby colored fluid. If this I saw--not so Rowena. She swallowed the wine
unhesitatingly, and I forebore to speak to her of a circumstance which
must, after all, I considered, have been but the suggestion of a vivid
imagination, rendered morbidly active by the terror of the lady, by the
opium, and by the hour.

Yet I cannot conceal [Transcriber's note: The original reads "coneal".]
it from my own perception that, immediately subsequent to the fall of
the ruby drops, a rapid change for the worse took place in the disorder
of my wife; so that, on the third subsequent night, the hands of her
menials prepared her for the tomb, and on the fourth, I sat alone, with
her shrouded body, in that fantastic chamber which had received her as
my bride. Wild visions, opium-engendered, flitted, shadow-like, before
me. I gazed with unquiet eye upon the sarcophagi in the angles of the
room, upon the varying figures of the drapery, and upon the writhing of
the parti-colored fires in the censer overhead. My eyes then fell, as I
called to mind the circumstances of a former night, to the spot beneath
the glare of the censer where I had seen the faint traces of the shadow.
It was there, however, no longer; and breathing with greater freedom, I
turned my glances to the pallid and rigid figure upon the bed. Then
rushed upon me a thousand memories of Ligeia--and then came back upon my
heart, with the turbulent violence of a flood, the whole of that
unutterable woe with which I had regarded _her_ thus enshrouded. The
night waned; and still, with a bosom full of bitter thoughts of the one
only and supremely beloved, I remained gazing upon the body of Rowena.

It might have been midnight, or perhaps earlier, or later, for I had
taken no note of time, when a sob, low, gentle, but very distinct,
startled me from my revery. I _felt_ that it came from the bed of
ebony--the bed of death. I listened in an agony of superstitious
terror--but there was no repetition of the sound. I strained my vision
to detect any motion in the corpse--but there was not the slightest
perceptible. Yet I could not have been deceived. I _had_ heard the
noise, however faint, and my soul was awakened within me. I resolutely
and perseveringly kept my attention riveted upon the body. Many minutes
elapsed before any circumstance occurred tending to throw light upon the
mystery. At length it became evident that a slight, a very feeble, and
barely noticeable tinge of color had flushed up within the cheeks, and
along the sunken small veins of the eyelids. Through a species of
unutterable horror and awe, for which the language of mortality has no
sufficiently energetic expression, I felt my heart cease to beat, my
limbs grow rigid where I sat. Yet a sense of duty finally operated to
restore my self-possession. I could no longer doubt that we had been
precipitate in our preparations--that Rowena still lived. It was
necessary that some immediate exertion be made; yet the turret was
altogether apart from the portion of the abbey tenanted by the
servants--there were none within call--I had no means of summoning them
to my aid without leaving the room for many minutes--and this I could
not venture to do. I therefore struggled alone in my endeavors to call
back the spirit still hovering. In a short period it was certain,
however, that a relapse had taken place; the color disappeared from both
eyelid and cheek, leaving a wanness even more than that of marble; the
lips became doubly shriveled and pinched up in the ghastly expression of
death; a repulsive clamminess and coldness overspread rapidly the
surface of the body; and all the usual rigorous stiffness immediately
supervened. I fell back with a shudder upon the couch from which I had
been so startlingly aroused, and again gave myself up to passionate
waking visions of Ligeia.

An hour thus elapsed, when (could it be possible?) I was a second time
aware of some vague sound issuing from the region of the bed. I
listened--in extremity of horror. The sound came again--it was a sigh.
Rushing to the corpse, I saw--distinctly saw--a tremor upon the lips. In
a minute afterward they relaxed, disclosing a bright line of the pearly
teeth. Amazement now struggled in my bosom with the profound awe which
had hitherto reigned there alone. I felt that my vision grew dim, that
my reason wandered; and it was only by a violent effort that I at length
succeeded in nerving myself to the task which duty thus once more had
pointed out. There was now a partial glow upon the forehead and upon the
cheek and throat; a perceptible warmth pervaded the whole frame; there
was even a slight pulsation at the heart. The lady _lived_; and with
redoubled ardor I betook myself to the task of restoration. I chafed and
bathed the temples and the hands and used every exertion which
experience, and no little medical reading, could suggest. But in vain.
Suddenly, the color fled, the pulsation ceased, the lips resumed the
expression of the dead, and, in an instant afterward, the whole body
took upon itself the icy chilliness, the livid hue, the intense
rigidity, the sunken outline, and all the loathsome peculiarities of
that which has been, for many days, a tenant of the tomb.

And again I sunk into visions of Ligeia--and again (what marvel that I
shudder while I write?), _again_ there reached my ears a low sob from
the region of the ebony bed. But why shall I minutely detail the
unspeakable horrors of that night? Why shall I pause to relate how, time
after time, until near the period of the gray dawn, this hideous drama
of revivification was repeated; how each terrific relapse was only into
a sterner and apparently more irredeemable death; how each agony wore
the aspect of a struggle with some invisible foe; and how each struggle
was succeeded by I know not what of wild change in the personal
appearance of the corpse? Let me hurry to a conclusion.

The greater part of the fearful night had worn away, and she who had
been dead once again stirred--and now more vigorously than hitherto,
although arousing from a dissolution more appalling in its utter
hopelessness than any. I had long ceased to struggle or to move, and
remained sitting rigidly upon the ottoman, a helpless prey to a whirl
of violent emotions, of which extreme awe was perhaps the least
terrible, the least consuming. The corpse, I repeat, stirred, and now
more vigorously than before. The hues of life flushed up with unwonted
energy into the countenance--the limbs relaxed--and, save that the
eyelids were yet pressed heavily together, and that the bandages and
draperies of the grave still imparted their charnel character to the
figure, I might have dreamed that Rowena had indeed shaken off, utterly,
the fetters of Death. But if this idea was not, even then, altogether
adopted, I could at least doubt no longer, when, arising from the bed,
tottering, with feeble steps, with closed eyes, and with the manner of
one bewildered in a dream, the thing that was enshrouded advanced boldly
and palpably into the middle of the apartment.

I trembled not--I stirred not--for a crowd of unutterable fancies
connected with the air, the stature, the demeanor, of the figure,
rushing hurriedly through my brain, had paralyzed--had chilled me into
stone. I stirred not--but gazed upon the apparition. There was a mad
disorder in my thoughts--a tumult unappeasable. Could it, indeed, be the
_living_ Rowena who confronted me? Could it, indeed, be Rowena _at
all_--the fair-haired, the blue-eyed Lady Rowena Trevanion of Tremaine?
Why, _why_ should I doubt it? The bandage lay heavily about the
mouth--but then might it not be the mouth of the breathing Lady of
Tremaine? And the cheeks--there were the roses as in her noon of
life--yes, these might indeed be the fair cheeks of the living Lady of
Tremaine. And the chin, with its dimples, as in health, might it not be
hers?--but _had she then grown taller since her malady?_ What
inexpressible madness seized me with that thought? One bound, and I had
reached her feet! Shrinking from my touch, she let fall from her head,
unloosened, the ghastly cerements which had confined it, and there
streamed forth into the rushing atmosphere of the chamber huge masses of
long and disheveled hair; _it was blacker than the raven wings of
midnight._ And now slowly opened _the eyes_ of the figure which stood
before me. "Here then, at least," I shrieked aloud, "can I never--can I
never be mistaken--these are the full, and the black, and the wild
eyes--of my lost love--of the Lady--of the LADY LIGEIA."



The Haunted Orchard

BY RICHARD LE GALLIENNE

     From _Harper's Magazine_, January, 1912. By permission of Harper
     and Brothers and Richard Le Gallienne.


Spring was once more in the world. As she sang to herself in the faraway
woodlands her voice reached even the ears of the city, weary with the
long winter. Daffodils flowered at the entrances to the Subway,
furniture removing vans blocked the side streets, children clustered
like blossoms on the doorsteps, the open cars were running, and the cry
of the "cash clo'" man was once more heard in the land.

Yes, it was the spring, and the city dreamed wistfully of lilacs and the
dewy piping of birds in gnarled old apple-trees, of dogwood lighting up
with sudden silver the thickening woods, of water-plants unfolding their
glossy scrolls in pools of morning freshness.

On Sunday mornings, the outbound trains were thronged with eager
pilgrims, hastening out of the city, to behold once more the ancient
marvel of the spring; and, on Sunday evenings, the railway termini were
aflower with banners of blossom from rifled woodland and orchard carried
in the hands of the returning pilgrims, whose eyes still shone with the
spring magic, in whose ears still sang the fairy music.

And as I beheld these signs of the vernal equinox I knew that I, too,
must follow the music, forsake awhile the beautiful siren we call the
city, and in the green silences meet once more my sweetheart Solitude.

As the train drew out of the Grand Central, I hummed to myself,

    "I've a neater, sweeter maiden, in a greener, cleaner land"

and so I said good-by to the city, and went forth with beating heart to
meet the spring.

I had been told of an almost forgotten corner on the south coast of
Connecticut, where the spring and I could live in an inviolate
loneliness--a place uninhabited save by birds and blossoms, woods and
thick grass, and an occasional silent farmer, and pervaded by the breath
and shimmer of the Sound.

Nor had rumor lied, for when the train set me down at my destination I
stepped out into the most wonderful green hush, a leafy Sabbath silence
through which the very train, as it went farther on its way, seemed to
steal as noiselessly as possible for fear of breaking the spell.

After a winter in the town, to be dropped thus suddenly into the intense
quiet of the country-side makes an almost ghostly impression upon one,
as of an enchanted silence, a silence that listens and watches but
never speaks, finger on lip. There is a spectral quality about
everything upon which the eye falls: the woods, like great green clouds,
the wayside flowers, the still farm-houses half lost in orchard
bloom--all seem to exist in a dream. Everything is so still, everything
so supernaturally green. Nothing moves or talks, except the gentle
susurrus of the spring wind swaying the young buds high up in the quiet
sky, or a bird now and again, or a little brook singing softly to itself
among the crowding rushes.

Though, from the houses one notes here and there, there are evidently
human inhabitants of this green silence, none are to be seen. I have
often wondered where the countryfolk hide themselves, as I have walked
hour after hour, past farm and croft and lonely door-yards, and never
caught sight of a human face. If you should want to ask the way, a
farmer is as shy as a squirrel, and if you knock at a farm-house door,
all is as silent as a rabbit-warren.

As I walked along in the enchanted stillness, I came at length to a
quaint old farm-house--"old Colonial" in its architecture--embowered in
white lilacs, and surrounded by an orchard of ancient apple-trees which
cast a rich shade on the deep spring grass. The orchard had the
impressiveness of those old religious groves, dedicated to the strange
worship of sylvan gods, gods to be found now only in Horace or Catullus,
and in the hearts of young poets to whom the beautiful antique Latin is
still dear.

The old house seemed already the abode of Solitude. As I lifted the
latch of the white gate and walked across the forgotten grass, and up on
to the veranda already festooned with wistaria, and looked into the
window, I saw Solitude sitting by an old piano, on which no composer
later than Bach had ever been played.

In other words, the house was empty; and going round to the back, where
old barns and stables leaned together as if falling asleep, I found a
broken pane, and so climbed in and walked through the echoing rooms. The
house was very lonely. Evidently no one had lived in it for a long time.
Yet it was all ready for some occupant, for whom it seemed to be
waiting. Quaint old four-poster bedsteads stood in three rooms--dimity
curtains and spotless linen--old oak chests and mahogany presses; and,
opening drawers in Chippendale sideboards, I came upon beautiful frail
old silver and exquisite china that set me thinking of a beautiful
grandmother of mine, made out of old lace and laughing wrinkles and
mischievous old blue eyes.

There was one little room that particularly interested me, a tiny
bedroom all white, and at the window the red roses were already in bud.
But what caught my eye with peculiar sympathy was a small bookcase, in
which were some twenty or thirty volumes, wearing the same forgotten
expression--forgotten and yet cared for--which lay like a kind of
memorial charm upon everything in the old house. Yes, everything seemed
forgotten and yet everything, curiously--even religiously--remembered. I
took out book after book from the shelves, once or twice flowers fell
out from the pages--and I caught sight of a delicate handwriting here
and there and frail markings. It was evidently the little intimate
library of a young girl. What surprised me most was to find that quite
half the books were in French--French poets and French romancers: a
charming, very rare edition of Ronsard, a beautifully printed edition of
Alfred de Musset, and a copy of Theophile Gautier's _Mademoiselle de
Maupin_. How did these exotic books come to be there alone in a deserted
New England farm-house?

This question was to be answered later in a strange way. Meanwhile I had
fallen in love with the sad, old, silent place, and as I closed the
white gate and was once more on the road, I looked about for someone who
could tell me whether or not this house of ghosts might be rented for
the summer by a comparatively living man.

I was referred to a fine old New England farm-house shining white
through the trees a quarter of a mile away. There I met an ancient
couple, a typical New England farmer and his wife; the old man, lean,
chin-bearded, with keen gray eyes flickering occasionally with a shrewd
humor, the old lady with a kindly old face of the withered-apple type
and ruddy. They were evidently prosperous people, but their minds--for
some reason I could not at the moment divine--seemed to be divided
between their New England desire to drive a hard bargain and their
disinclination to let the house at all.

Over and over again they spoke of the loneliness of the place. They
feared I would find it very lonely. No one had lived in it for a long
time, and so on. It seemed to me that afterwards I understood their
curious hesitation, but at the moment only regarded it as a part of the
circuitous New England method of bargaining. At all events, the rent I
offered finally overcame their disinclination, whatever its cause, and
so I came into possession--for four months--of that silent old house,
with the white lilacs, and the drowsy barns, and the old piano, and the
strange orchard; and, as the summer came on, and the year changed its
name from May to June, I used to lie under the apple-trees in the
afternoons, dreamily reading some old book, and through half-sleepy
eyelids watching the silken shimmer of the Sound.

I had lived in the old house for about a month, when one afternoon a
strange thing happened to me. I remember the date well. It was the
afternoon of Tuesday, June 13th. I was reading, or rather dipping here
and there, in Burton's _Anatomy of Melancholy_. As I read, I remember
that a little unripe apple, with a petal or two of blossom still
clinging to it, fell upon the old yellow page. Then I suppose I must
have fallen into a dream, though it seemed to me that both my eyes and
my ears were wide open, for I suddenly became aware of a beautiful
young voice singing very softly somewhere among the leaves. The singing
was very frail, almost imperceptible, as though it came out of the air.
It came and went fitfully, like the elusive fragrance of sweetbrier--as
though a girl was walking to and fro, dreamily humming to herself in the
still afternoon. Yet there was no one to be seen. The orchard had never
seemed more lonely. And another fact that struck me as strange was that
the words that floated to me out of the aerial music were French, half
sad, half gay snatches of some long-dead singer of old France, I looked
about for the origin of the sweet sounds, but in vain. Could it be the
birds that were singing in French in this strange orchard? Presently the
voice seemed to come quite close to me, so near that it might have been
the voice of a dryad singing to me out of the tree against which I was
leaning. And this time I distinctly caught the words of the sad little
song:

    _"Chante, rossignol, chante,
    Toi qui as le coeur gai;
    Tu as le coeur a rire,
    Moi, je l'ai-t-a pleurer."_

But, though the voice was at my shoulder, I could see no one, and then
the singing stopped with what sounded like a sob; and a moment or two
later I seemed to hear a sound of sobbing far down the orchard. Then
there followed silence, and I was left to ponder on the strange
occurrence. Naturally, I decided that it was just a day-dream between
sleeping and waking over the pages of an old book; yet when next day and
the day after the invisible singer was in the orchard again, I could not
be satisfied with such mere matter-of-fact explanation.

    _"A la claire fontaine,"_

went the voice to and fro through the thick orchard boughs,

    _"M'en allant promener,
    J'ai trouve l'eau si belle
    Que je m'y suis baigne,
    Lui y a longtemps que je t'aime,
    Jamais je ne t'oubliai."_

It was certainly uncanny to hear that voice going to and fro the
orchard, there somewhere amid the bright sun-dazzled boughs--yet not a
human creature to be seen--not another house even within half a mile.
The most materialistic mind could hardly but conclude that here was
something "not dreamed of in our philosophy." It seemed to me that the
only reasonable explanation was the entirely irrational one--that my
orchard was haunted: haunted by some beautiful young spirit, with some
sorrow of lost joy that would not let her sleep quietly in her grave.

And next day I had a curious confirmation of my theory. Once more I was
lying under my favorite apple-tree, half reading and half watching the
Sound, lulled into a dream by the whir of insects and the spices called
up from the earth by the hot sun. As I bent over the page, I suddenly
had the startling impression that someone was leaning over my shoulder
and reading with me, and that a girl's long hair was falling over me
down on to the page. The book was the Ronsard I had found in the little
bedroom. I turned, but again there was nothing there. Yet this time I
knew that I had not been dreaming, and I cried out:

"Poor child! tell me of your grief--that I may help your sorrowing heart
to rest."

But, of course, there was no answer; yet that night I dreamed a strange
dream. I thought I was in the orchard again in the afternoon and once
again heard the strange singing--but this time, as I looked up, the
singer was no longer invisible. Coming toward me was a young girl with
wonderful blue eyes filled with tears and gold hair that fell to her
waist. She wore a straight, white robe that might have been a shroud or
a bridal dress. She appeared not to see me, though she came directly to
the tree where I was sitting. And there she knelt and buried her face in
the grass and sobbed as if her heart would break. Her long hair fell
over her like a mantle, and in my dream I stroked it pityingly and
murmured words of comfort for a sorrow I did not understand.... Then I
woke suddenly as one does from dreams. The moon was shining brightly
into the room. Rising from my bed, I looked out into the orchard. It was
almost as bright as day. I could plainly see the tree of which I had
been dreaming, and then a fantastic notion possessed me. Slipping on my
clothes, I went out into one of the old barns and found a spade. Then I
went to the tree where I had seen the girl weeping in my dream and dug
down at its foot.

I had dug little more than a foot when my spade struck upon some hard
substance, and in a few more moments I had uncovered and exhumed a small
box, which, on examination, proved to be one of those pretty
old-fashioned Chippendale work-boxes used by our grandmothers to keep
their thimbles and needles in, their reels of cotton and skeins of silk.
After smoothing down the little grave in which I had found it, I carried
the box into the house, and under the lamplight examined its contents.

Then at once I understood why that sad young spirit went to and fro the
orchard singing those little French songs--for the treasure-trove I had
found under the apple-tree, the buried treasure of an unquiet, suffering
soul, proved to be a number of love-letters written mostly in French in
a very picturesque hand--letters, too, written but some five or six
years before. Perhaps I should not have read them--yet I read them with
such reverence for the beautiful, impassioned love that animated them,
and literally made them "smell sweet and blossom in the dust," that I
felt I had the sanction of the dead to make myself the confidant of
their story. Among the letters were little songs, two of which I had
heard the strange young voice singing in the orchard, and, of course,
there were many withered flowers and such like remembrances of bygone
rapture.

Not that night could I make out all the story, though it was not
difficult to define its essential tragedy, and later on a gossip in the
neighborhood and a headstone in the churchyard told me the rest. The
unquiet young soul that had sung so wistfully to and fro the orchard was
my landlord's daughter. She was the only child of her parents, a
beautiful, willful girl, exotically unlike those from whom she was
sprung and among whom she lived with a disdainful air of exile. She was,
as a child, a little creature of fairy fancies, and as she grew up it
was plain to her father and mother that she had come from another world
than theirs. To them she seemed like a child in an old fairy-tale
strangely found on his hearth by some shepherd as he returns from the
fields at evening--a little fairy girl swaddled in fine linen, and
dowered with a mysterious bag of gold.

Soon she developed delicate spiritual needs to which her simple parents
were strangers. From long truancies in the woods she would come home
laden with mysterious flowers, and soon she came to ask for books and
pictures and music, of which the poor souls that had given her birth had
never heard. Finally she had her way, and went to study at a certain
fashionable college; and there the brief romance of her life began.
There she met a romantic young Frenchman who had read Ronsard to her and
written her those picturesque letters I had found in the old mahogany
work-box. And after a while the young Frenchman had gone back to France,
and the letters had ceased. Month by month went by, and at length one
day, as she sat wistful at the window, looking out at the foolish sunlit
road, a message came. He was dead. That headstone in the village
churchyard tells the rest. She was very young to die--scarcely nineteen
years; and the dead who have died young, with all their hopes and dreams
still like unfolded buds within their hearts, do not rest so quietly in
the grave as those who have gone through the long day from morning until
evening and are only too glad to sleep.

       *       *       *       *       *

Next day I took the little box to a quiet corner of the orchard, and
made a little pyre of fragrant boughs--for so I interpreted the wish of
that young, unquiet spirit--and the beautiful words are now safe, taken
up again into the aerial spaces from which they came.

But since then the birds sing no more little French songs in my old
orchard.



The Bowmen

BY ARTHUR MACHEN

     From _The Bowmen_, by Arthur Machen. Published in England by
     Simpkin, Marshall, Hamilton, Kent & Co., Ltd., and in America by
     G.P. Putnam's Sons. By permission of the publishers and Arthur
     Machen.


It was during the Retreat of the Eighty Thousand, and the authority of
the Censorship is sufficient excuse for not being more explicit. But it
was on the most awful day of that awful time, on the day when ruin and
disaster came so near that their shadow fell over London far away; and,
without any certain news, the hearts of men failed within them and grew
faint; as if the agony of the army in the battlefield had entered into
their souls.


On this dreadful day, then, when three hundred thousand men in arms with
all their artillery swelled like a flood against the little English
company, there was one point above all other points in our battle line
that was for a time in awful danger, not merely of defeat, but of utter
annihilation. With the permission of the Censorship and of the military
expert, this corner may, perhaps, be described as a salient, and if this
angle were crushed and broken, then the English force as a whole would
be shattered, the Allied left would be turned, and Sedan would
inevitably follow.

All the morning the German guns had thundered and shrieked against this
corner, and against the thousand or so of men who held it. The men joked
at the shells, and found funny names for them, and had bets about them,
and greeted them with scraps of music-hall songs. But the shells came on
and burst, and tore good Englishmen limb from limb, and tore brother
from brother, and as the heat of the day increased so did the fury of
that terrific cannonade. There was no help, it seemed. The English
artillery was good, but there was not nearly enough of it; it was being
steadily battered into scrap iron.

There comes a moment in a storm at sea when people say to one another,
"It is at its worst; it can blow no harder," and then there is a blast
ten times more fierce than any before it. So it was in these British
trenches.

There were no stouter hearts in the whole world than the hearts of these
men; but even they were appalled as this seven-times-heated hell of the
German cannonade fell upon them and overwhelmed them and destroyed them.
And at this very moment they saw from their trenches that a tremendous
host was moving against their lines. Five hundred of the thousand
remained, and as far as they could see the German infantry was pressing
on against them, column upon column, a gray world of men, ten thousand
of them, as it appeared afterwards.

There was no hope at all. They shook hands, some of them. One man
improvised a new version of the battle-song, "Good-by, good-by to
Tipperary," ending with "And we shan't get there." And they all went on
firing steadily. The officer pointed out that such an opportunity for
high-class fancy shooting might never occur again; the Tipperary
humorist asked, "What price Sidney Street?" And the few machine guns did
their best. But everybody knew it was of no use. The dead gray bodies
lay in companies and battalions, as others came on and on and on, and
they swarmed and stirred, and advanced from beyond and beyond.

"World without end. Amen," said one of the British soldiers with some
irrelevance as he took aim and fired. And then he remembered--he says he
cannot think why or wherefore--a queer vegetarian restaurant in London
where he had once or twice eaten eccentric dishes of cutlets made of
lentils and nuts that pretended to be steak. On all the plates in this
restaurant there was printed a figure of St. George in blue, with the
motto, "_Adsit Anglis Sanctus Georgius_"--"May St. George be a present
help to the English." This soldier happened to know Latin and other
useless things, and now, as he fired at his man in the gray advancing
mass--three hundred yards away--he uttered the pious vegetarian motto.
He went on firing to the end, and at last Bill on his right had to clout
him cheerfully over the head to make him stop, pointing out as he did so
that the King's ammunition cost money and was not lightly to be wasted
in drilling funny patterns into dead Germans.

For as the Latin scholar uttered his invocation he felt something
between a shudder and an electric shock pass through his body. The roar
of the battle died down in his ears to a gentle murmur; instead of it,
he says, he heard a great voice and a shout louder than a thunder-peal
crying, "Array, array, array!"

His heart grew hot as a burning coal, it grew cold as ice within him, as
it seemed to him that a tumult of voices answered to his summons. He
heard, or seemed to hear, thousands shouting: "St. George! St. George!"

"Ha! Messire, ha! sweet Saint, grant us good deliverance!"

"St. George for merry England!"

"Harow! Harow! Monseigneur St. George, succor us!"

"Ha! St. George! Ha! St. George! a long bow and a strong bow."

"Heaven's Knight, aid us!"

And as the soldier heard these voices he saw before him, beyond the
trench, a long line of shapes, with a shining about them. They were like
men who drew the bow, and with another shout, their cloud of arrows flew
singing and tingling through the air towards the German hosts.

The other men in the trench were firing all the while. They had no hope;
but they aimed just as if they had been shooting at Bisley.

Suddenly one of them lifted up his voice in the plainest English.

"Gawd help us!" he bellowed to the man next to him, "but we're blooming
marvels! Look at those gray ... gentlemen, look at them! D'ye see them?
They're not going down in dozens nor in 'undreds; it's thousands, it is.
Look! look! there's a regiment gone while I'm talking to ye."

"Shut it!" the other soldier bellowed, taking aim, "what are ye gassing
about?"

But he gulped with astonishment even as he spoke, for, indeed, the gray
men were falling by the thousands. The English could hear the guttural
scream of the German officers, the crackle of their revolvers as they
shot the reluctant; and still line after line crashed to the earth.

All the while the Latin-bred soldier heard the cry:

"Harow! Harow! Monseigneur, dear Saint, quick to our aid! St. George
help us!"

"High Chevalier, defend us!"

The singing arrows fled so swift and thick that they darkened the air,
the heathen horde melted from before them.

"More machine guns!" Bill yelled to Tom.

"Don't hear them," Tom yelled back.

"But, thank God, anyway; they've got it in the neck."

In fact, there were ten thousand dead German soldiers left before that
salient of the English army, and consequently there was no Sedan. In
Germany, a country ruled by scientific principles, the Great General
Staff decided that the contemptible English must have employed shells
containing an unknown gas of a poisonous nature, as no wounds were
discernible on the bodies of the dead German soldiers. But the man who
knew what nuts tasted like when they called themselves steak knew also
that St. George had brought his Agincourt Bowmen to help the English.



A Ghost

BY GUY DE MAUPASSANT

     Translated for this volume by M. Charles Sommer.


We were speaking of sequestration, alluding to a recent lawsuit. It was
at the close of a friendly evening in a very old mansion in the Rue de
Grenelle, and each of the guests had a story to tell, which he assured
us was true.

Then the old Marquis de la Tour-Samuel, eighty-two years of age, rose
and came forward to lean on the mantelpiece. He told the following story
in his slightly quavering voice.

"I, also, have witnessed a strange thing--so strange that it has been
the nightmare of my life. It happened fifty-six years ago, and yet there
is not a month when I do not see it again in my dreams. From that day I
have borne a mark, a stamp of fear,--do you understand?

"Yes, for ten minutes I was a prey to terror, in such a way that ever
since a constant dread has remained in my soul. Unexpected sounds chill
me to the heart; objects which I can ill distinguish in the evening
shadows make me long to flee. I am afraid at night.

"No! I would not have owned such a thing before reaching my present
age. But now I may tell everything. One may fear imaginary dangers at
eighty-two years old. But before actual danger I have never turned back,
_mesdames_.

"That affair so upset my mind, filled me with such a deep, mysterious
unrest that I never could tell it. I kept it in that inmost part, that
corner where we conceal our sad, our shameful secrets, all the
weaknesses of our life which cannot be confessed.

"I will tell you that strange happening just as it took place, with no
attempt to explain it. Unless I went mad for one short hour it must be
explainable, though. Yet I was not mad, and I will prove it to you.
Imagine what you will. Here are the simple facts:

"It was in 1827, in July. I was quartered with my regiment in Rouen.

"One day, as I was strolling on the quay, I came across a man I believed
I recognized, though I could not place him with certainty. I
instinctively went more slowly, ready to pause. The stranger saw my
impulse, looked at me, and fell into my arms.

"It was a friend of my younger days, of whom I had been very fond. He
seemed to have become half a century older in the five years since I had
seen him. His hair was white, and he stooped in his walk, as if he were
exhausted. He understood my amazement and told me the story of his life.

"A terrible event had broken him down. He had fallen madly in love with
a young girl and married her in a kind of dreamlike ecstasy. After a
year of unalloyed bliss and unexhausted passion, she had died suddenly
of heart disease, no doubt killed by love itself.

"He had left the country on the very day of her funeral, and had come to
live in his hotel at Rouen. He remained there, solitary and desperate,
grief slowly mining him, so wretched that he constantly thought of
suicide.

"'As I thus came across you again,' he said, 'I shall ask a great favor
of you. I want you to go to my chateau and get some papers I urgently
need. They are in the writing-desk of my room, of _our_ room. I cannot
send a servant or a lawyer, as the errand must be kept private. I want
absolute silence.

"'I shall give you the key of the room, which I locked carefully myself
before leaving, and the key to the writing-desk. I shall also give you a
note for the gardener, who will let you in.

"'Come to breakfast with me to-morrow, and we'll talk the matter over.'

"I promised to render him that slight service. It would mean but a
pleasant excursion for me, his home not being more than twenty-five
miles from Rouen. I could go there in an hour on horseback.

"At ten o'clock the next day I was with him. We breakfasted alone
together, yet he did not utter more than twenty words. He asked me to
excuse him. The thought that I was going to visit the room where his
happiness lay shattered, upset him, he said. Indeed, he seemed
perturbed, worried, as if some mysterious struggle were taking place in
his soul.

"At last he explained exactly what I was to do. It was very simple. I
was to take two packages of letters and some papers, locked in the first
drawer at the right of the desk of which I had the key. He added:

"'I need not ask you not to glance at them.'

"I was almost hurt by his words, and told him so, rather sharply. He
stammered:

"'Forgive me. I suffer so much!'

"And tears came to his eyes.

"I left about one o'clock to accomplish my errand.

"The day was radiant, and I rushed through the meadows, listening to the
song of the larks, and the rhythmical beat of my sword on my
riding-boots.

"Then I entered the forest, and I set my horse to walking. Branches of
the trees softly caressed my face, and now and then I would catch a leaf
between my teeth and bite it with avidity, full of the joy of life, such
as fills you without reason, with a tumultuous happiness almost
indefinable, a kind of magical strength.

"As I neared the house I took out the letter for the gardener, and noted
with surprise that it was sealed. I was so amazed and so annoyed that I
almost turned back without fulfilling my mission. Then I thought that I
should thus display over-sensitiveness and bad taste. My friend might
have sealed it unconsciously, worried as he was.

"The manor looked as though it had been deserted the last twenty years.
The gate, wide-open and rotten, held, one wondered how. Grass filled the
paths; you could not tell the flower-beds from the lawn.

"At the noise I made kicking a shutter, an old man came out from a
side-door and was apparently amazed to see me there. I dismounted from
my horse and gave him the letter. He read it once or twice, turned it
over, looked at me with suspicion, and asked:

"'Well, what do you want?'

"I answered sharply:

"'You must know it as you have read your master's orders. I want to get
in the house.'

"He appeared overwhelmed. He said:

"'So--you are going in--in his room?'

"I was getting impatient.

"'_Parbleu!_ Do you intend to question me, by chance?'

"He stammered:

"'No--monsieur--only--it has not been opened since--since the death. If
you will wait five minutes, I will go in to see whether----'

"I interrupted angrily:

"'See here, are you joking? You can't go in that room, as I have the
key!'

"He no longer knew what to say.

"'Then, monsieur, I will show you the way.'

"'Show me the stairs and leave me alone. I can find it without your
help.'

"'But--still--monsieur----'

"Then I lost my temper.

"'Now be quiet! Else you'll be sorry!'

"I roughly pushed him aside and went into the house.

"I first went through the kitchen, then crossed two small rooms occupied
by the man and his wife. From there I stepped into a large hall. I went
up the stairs, and I recognized the door my friend had described to me.

"I opened it with ease and went in.

"The room was so dark that at first I could not distinguish anything. I
paused, arrested by that moldy and stale odor peculiar to deserted and
condemned rooms, of dead rooms. Then gradually my eyes grew accustomed
to the gloom, and I saw rather clearly a great room in disorder, a bed
without sheets having still its mattresses and pillows, one of which
bore the deep print of an elbow or a head, as if someone had just been
resting on it.

"The chairs seemed all in confusion. I noticed that a door, probably
that of a closet, had remained ajar.

"I first went to the window and opened it to get some light, but the
hinges of the outside shutters were so rusted that I could not loosen
them.

"I even tried to break them with my sword, but did not succeed. As those
fruitless attempts irritated me, and as my eyes were by now adjusted to
the dim light, I gave up hope of getting more light and went toward the
writing-desk.

"I sat down in an arm-chair, folded back the top, and opened the drawer.
It was full to the edge. I needed but three packages, which I knew how
to distinguish, and I started looking for them.

"I was straining my eyes to decipher the inscriptions, when I thought I
heard, or rather felt a rustle behind me. I took no notice, thinking a
draft had lifted some curtain. But a minute later, another movement,
almost indistinct, sent a disagreeable little shiver over my skin. It
was so ridiculous to be moved thus even so slightly, that I would not
turn round, being ashamed. I had just discovered the second package I
needed, and was on the point of reaching for the third, when a great and
sorrowful sigh, close to my shoulder, made me give a mad leap two yards
away. In my spring I had turned round, my hand on the hilt of my sword,
and surely had I not felt that, I should have fled like a coward.

"A tall woman, dressed in white, was facing me, standing behind the
chair in which I had sat a second before.

"Such a shudder ran through me that I almost fell back! Oh, no one who
has not felt them can understand those gruesome and ridiculous terrors!
The soul melts; your heart seems to stop; your whole body becomes limp
as a sponge, and your innermost parts seem collapsing.

"I do not believe in ghosts; and yet I broke down before the hideous
fear of the dead; and I suffered, oh, I suffered more in a few minutes,
in the irresistible anguish of supernatural dread, than I have suffered
in all the rest of my life!

"If she had not spoken, I might have died. But she did speak; she spoke
in a soft and plaintive voice which set my nerves vibrating. I could not
say that I regained my self-control. No, I was past knowing what I did;
but the kind of pride I have in me, as well as a military pride, helped
me to maintain, almost in spite of myself, an honorable countenance. I
was making a pose, a pose for myself, and for her, for her, whatever she
was, woman, or phantom. I realized this later, for at the time of the
apparition, I could think of nothing. I was afraid.

"She said:

"'Oh, you can be of great help to me, monsieur!'

"I tried to answer, but I was unable to utter one word. A vague sound
came from my throat.

"She continued:

"'Will you? You can save me, cure me. I suffer terribly. I always
suffer. I suffer, oh, I suffer!'

"And she sat down gently in my chair. She looked at me.

"'Will you?'

"I nodded my head, being still paralyzed.

"Then she handed me a woman's comb of tortoise-shell, and murmured:

"'Comb my hair! Oh, comb my hair! That will cure me. Look at my
head--how I suffer! And my hair--how it hurts!'

"Her loose hair, very long, very black, it seemed to me, hung over the
back of the chair, touching the floor.

"Why did I do it? Why did I, shivering, accept that comb, and why did I
take between my hands her long hair, which left on my skin a ghastly
impression of cold, as if I had handled serpents? I do not know.

"That feeling still clings about my fingers, and I shiver when I recall
it.

"I combed her, I handled, I know not how, that hair of ice. I bound and
unbound it; I plaited it as one plaits a horse's mane. She sighed, bent
her head, seemed happy.

"Suddenly she said, 'Thank you!' tore the comb from my hands, and fled
through the door which I had noticed was half opened.

"Left alone, I had for a few seconds the hazy feeling one feels in
waking up from a nightmare. Then I recovered myself. I ran to the window
and broke the shutters by my furious assault.

"A stream of light poured in. I rushed to the door through which that
being had gone. I found it locked and immovable.

"Then a fever of flight seized on me, a panic, the true panic of battle.
I quickly grasped the three packages of letters from the open desk; I
crossed the room running, I took the steps of the stairway four at a
time. I found myself outside, I don't know how, and seeing my horse
close by, I mounted in one leap and left at a full gallop.

"I didn't stop till I reached Rouen and drew up in front of my house.
Having thrown the reins to my orderly, I flew to my room and locked
myself in to think.

"Then for an hour I asked myself whether I had not been the victim of an
hallucination. Certainly I must have had one of those nervous shocks,
one of those brain disorders such as give rise to miracles, to which the
supernatural owes its strength.

"And I had almost concluded that it was a vision, an illusion of my
senses, when I came near to the window. My eyes by chance looked down.
My tunic was covered with hairs, long woman's hairs which had entangled
themselves around the buttons!

"I took them off one by one and threw them out of the window with
trembling fingers.

"I then called my orderly. I felt too perturbed, too moved, to go and
see my friend on that day. Besides, I needed to think over what I should
tell him.

"I had his letters delivered to him. He gave a receipt to the soldier.
He inquired after me and was told that I was not well. I had had a
sunstroke, or something. He seemed distressed.

"I went to see him the next day, early in the morning, bent on telling
him the truth. He had gone out the evening before and had not come
back.

"I returned the same day, but he had not been seen. I waited a week. He
did not come back. I notified the police. They searched for him
everywhere, but no one could find any trace of his passing or of his
retreat.

"A careful search was made in the deserted manor. No suspicious clue was
discovered.

"There was no sign that a woman had been concealed there.

"The inquest gave no result, and so the search went no further.

"And in fifty-six years I have learned nothing more. I never found out
the truth."

                                                                    PAGE

Preface                                                                5

The Black Cat                                                          7

The Flayed Hand                                                       28

The Vengeance of a Tree                                               37

The Parlor-Car Ghost                                                  44

Ghost of Buckstown Inn                                                51

The Burglar’s Ghost                                                   59

A Phantom Toe                                                         76

Mrs. Davenport’s Ghost                                                81

The Phantom Woman                                                     90

The Phantom Hag                                                      100

From the Tomb                                                        105

Sandy’s Ghost                                                        114

The Ghosts of Red Creek                                              123

The Spectre Bride                                                    128

How He Caught the Ghost                                              134

Grand-Dame’s Ghost Story                                             144

A Fight with a Ghost                                                 153

Colonel Halifax’s Ghost Story                                        168

The Ghost of the Count                                               190

The Old Mansion                                                      202

A Misfit Ghost                                                       210

An Unbidden Guest                                                    215

The Dead Woman’s Photograph                                          220

The Ghost of a Live Man                                              228

The Ghost of Washington                                              236




PREFACE


This collection of ghost stories owes its publication to an interest
that I have long felt in the supernatural and in works of the
imagination. As a child I was deeply concerned in tales of spooks,
haunted houses, wraiths and specters and stories of weird experiences,
clanking chains, ghostly sights and gruesome sounds always held me
spellbound and breathless.

Experiences in editorial offices taught me that I was not alone in
liking stories of mystery. The desire to know something of that
existence that is veiled by Death is equally potent in old age and in
youth, and men, women and children like to be thrilled and to have a
“creepy” feeling along the spinal column as the result of reading of a
visitor from beyond the grave.

This volume contains the most famous of the weird stories of Edgar Allan
Poe, that master of this form of literature. “The Black Cat” contains
all the needed element of mystery and supernatural, and yet the feline
acts in a natural manner all of the time, and the story is quite
possibly true. It is only in the manner of its telling that the tale
becomes one that fittingly finds its place in this collection.

Guy de Maupassant, the clever Frenchman, is also represented by two
effective bits of work, and other less widely known writers have also
contributed stories that are worth reading, and when once read will be
remembered. There is not a story among the twenty-five that is not
worthy of close reading.

There has recently been a revival in interest in ghost stories. Many of
the high-class magazines have within a few months printed stories with
supernatural incidents, and writers whose names are known to all who
read have turned their attention to this form of literature.

Whether or not the reader believe in ghosts, he cannot fail to be
interested in this little book. Without venturing to express a positive
opinion either way, I will only say with Hamlet: “There are more things
in heaven and earth, Horatio, than are dreamt of in your philosophy.”

W. BOB HOLLAND.




Twenty-Five Ghost Stories




THE BLACK CAT.

BY EDGAR ALLAN POE.


For the most wild, yet most homely narrative which I am about to pen, I
neither expect nor solicit belief. Mad indeed would I be to expect it,
in a case where my very senses reject their own evidence. Yet, mad am I
not--and very surely do I not dream. But to-morrow I die, and to-day I
would unburden my soul. My immediate purpose is to place before the
world, plainly, succinctly and without comment a series of mere
household events. In their consequences, these events have
terrified--have tortured--have destroyed me. Yet I will not attempt to
expound them. To me they have presented little but horror, to many they
will seem less terrible than baroques. Hereafter, perhaps, some
intellect may be found which will reduce my phantasm to the
commonplace--some intellect more calm, more logical, and far less
excitable than my own, which will perceive in the circumstances I detail
with awe nothing more than an ordinary succession of very natural causes
and effects.

From my infancy I was noted for the docility and humanity of my
disposition. My tenderness of heart was even so conspicuous as to make
me the jest of my companions. I was especially fond of animals, and was
indulged by my parents with a great variety of pets. With these I spent
most of my time, and never was so happy as when feeding and caressing
them. This peculiarity of character grew with my growth, and in my
manhood I derived from it one of my principal sources of pleasure. To
those who have cherished an affection for a faithful and sagacious dog,
I need hardly be at the trouble of explaining the nature or the
intensity of the gratification thus derivable. There is something in the
unselfish and self-sacrificing love of a brute, which goes directly to
the heart of him who has had frequent occasion to test the paltry
friendship and gossamer fidelity of mere Man.

I married early, and was happy to find in my wife a disposition not
uncongenial with my own. Observing my partiality for domestic pets she
lost no opportunity of procuring those of the most agreeable kind. We
had birds, goldfish, a fine dog, rabbits, a small monkey and a cat.

This latter was a remarkably large and beautiful animal, entirely black,
and sagacious to an astonishing degree. In speaking of his intelligence,
my wife, who at heart was not a little tinctured with superstition, made
frequent allusion to the ancient popular notion, which regarded all
black cats as witches in disguise. Not that she was ever serious upon
this point--and I mention the matter at all for no better reason than
that it happens, just now, to be remembered.

Pluto--this was the cat’s name--was my favorite pet and playmate. I
alone fed him, and he attended me wherever I went about the house. It
was even with difficulty that I could prevent him from following me
through the streets.

Our friendship lasted, in this manner, for several years, during which
my general temperament and character--through the instrumentality of the
fiend Intemperance--had (I blush to confess it) experienced a radical
alteration for the worse. I grew, day by day, more moody, more
irritable, more regardless of the feelings of others. I suffered myself
to use intemperate language to my wife. At length I even offered her
personal violence. My pets, of course, were made to feel the change in
my disposition. I not only neglected them, but ill-used them. For Pluto,
however, I still retained sufficient regard to restrain me from
maltreating him, as I made no scruple of maltreating the rabbits, the
monkey or even the dog, when by accident or through affection they came
in my way. But my disease grew upon me--for what disease is like
alcohol! And at length even Pluto, who was now becoming old, and
consequently somewhat peevish--even Pluto began to experience the
effects of my ill-temper.

One night, returning home much intoxicated from one of my haunts about
town, I fancied that the cat avoided my presence. I seized him, when, in
his fright at my violence, he inflicted a slight wound upon my hand with
his teeth. The fury of a demon instantly possessed me. I knew myself no
longer. My original soul seemed, at once, to take its flight from my
body; and a more than fiendish malevolence, gin-nurtured, thrilled every
fiber of my frame. I took from my waistcoat pocket a penknife, opened
it, grasped the poor beast by the throat, and deliberately cut one of
its eyes from the socket! I blush, I burn, I shudder while I pen the
damnable atrocity.

When reason returned with the morning--when I had slept off the fumes of
the night’s debauch--I experienced a sentiment half of horror, half of
remorse, for the crime of which I had been guilty; but it was, at best,
a feeble and equivocal feeling, and the soul remained untouched. I again
plunged into excess, and soon drowned in wine all memory of the deed.

In the meantime the cat slowly recovered.

[Illustration: “_One night, returning home much intoxicated._”]

The socket of the lost eye presented, it is true, a frightful
appearance, but he no longer appeared to suffer any pain. He went about
the house as usual, but, as might be expected, fled in extreme terror at
my approach. I had so much of my old heart left as to be at first
grieved by this evident dislike on the part of a creature which had once
so loved me. But this feeling soon gave place to irritation. And then
came, as if to my final and irrevocable overthrow, the spirit of
perverseness. Of this spirit philosophy takes no account. Yet I am not
more sure that my soul lives than I am that perverseness is one of the
primitive impulses of the human heart--one of the indivisible primary
faculties or sentiments which give direction to the character of man.
Who has not, hundreds of times, found himself committing a vile or silly
action, for no other reason than because he knows he should not? Have we
not a perpetual inclination, in the teeth of our best judgment, to
violate that which is Law, merely because we understand it to be such?
This spirit of perverseness, I say, came to my final overthrow. It was
this unfathomable longing of the soul to vex itself--to offer violence
to its own nature--to do wrong for the wrong’s sake only--that urged me
to continue and finally to consummate the injury I had inflicted upon
the unoffending brute. One morning, in cold blood, I slipped a noose
about its neck, and hung it to the limb of a tree; hung it with the
tears streaming from my eyes and the bitterest remorse at my heart; hung
it because I knew that it had loved me, and because I felt it had given
me no offense; hung it because I knew that in so doing I was committing
a sin--a deadly sin that would so jeopardize my immortal soul as to
place it, if such a thing were possible--even beyond the reach of the
infinite mercy of the most merciful and most terrible God.

On the night of the day on which this cruel deed was done, I was aroused
from sleep by the cry of “fire!” The curtains of my bed were in flames.
The whole house was blazing. It was with great difficulty that my wife,
a servant and myself made our escape from the conflagration. The
destruction was complete. My entire worldly wealth was swallowed up, and
I resigned myself thenceforward to despair.

I am above the weakness of seeking to establish a sequence of cause and
effect between the disaster and the atrocity. But I am detailing a chain
of facts, and wish not to leave even a possible link imperfect. On the
day succeeding the fire I visited the ruins. The walls, with one
exception, had fallen in. This exception was found in a compartment
wall, not very thick, which stood about the middle of the house, and
against which had rested the head of my bed. The plastering had here, in
great measure, resisted the action of the fire--a fact which I
attributed to its having been recently spread. About this wall a dense
crowd were collected, and many persons seemed to be examining a
particular portion of it with very minute and eager attention. The words
“strange!” “singular!” and other similar expressions excited my
curiosity. I approached and saw, as if graven in bas-relief upon the
white surface, the figure of a gigantic cat. The impression was given
with an accuracy truly marvelous. There was a rope about the animal’s
neck.

When I first beheld this apparition--for I could scarcely regard it as
less--my wonder and my terror were extreme. But at length reflection
came to my aid. The cat, I remembered, had been hung in a garden
adjacent to the house. Upon the alarm of fire this garden had been
immediately filled by the crowd--by some one of whom the animal must
have been cut from the tree and thrown through an open window into my
chamber. This had probably been done with the view of arousing me from
sleep. The falling of other walls had compressed the victim of my
cruelty into the substance of the freshly spread plaster, the lime of
which with the flames, and the ammonia from the carcass, had then
accomplished the portraiture as I saw it.

Although I thus readily accounted to my reason, if not altogether to my
conscience, for the

[Illustration: “_Because I knew that it had loved me._”]

startling fact just detailed, it did not the less fail to make a deep
impression upon my fancy. For months I could not rid myself of the
phantasm of the cat; and, during this period, there came back into my
spirit a half sentiment that seemed, but was not, remorse. I went so far
as to regret the loss of the animal, and to look about me, among the
vile haunts which I now habitually frequented, for another pet of the
same species and of somewhat similar appearance, with which to supply
its place.

One night as I sat, half stupefied, in a den of more than infamy, my
attention was suddenly drawn to some black object, reposing upon the
head of one of the immense hogsheads of gin, or of rum, which
constituted the chief furniture of the apartment. I had been looking
steadily at the top of this hogshead for some minutes, and what now
caused me surprise was the fact that I had not sooner perceived the
object thereupon. I approached it and touched it with my hand. It was a
black cat--a very large one--fully as large as Pluto, and closely
resembling him in every respect, but only Pluto had not a white hair
upon any portion of his body; but this cat had a large, although
indefinite, splotch of white, covering nearly the whole region of the
breast.

Upon my touching him he immediately arose, purred loudly, rubbed against
my hand, and appeared delighted with my notice. This, then, was the
very creature of which I was in search. I at once offered to purchase it
of the landlord; but this person made no claim to it--knew nothing of
it--had never seen it before.

I continued my caresses, and when I prepared to go home the animal
evinced a disposition to accompany me. I permitted it to do so,
occasionally stooping and patting it as I proceeded. When it reached the
house it domesticated itself at once, and became immediately a great
favorite with my wife.

For my own part, I soon found a dislike to it arising within me. This
was just the reverse of what I had anticipated; but--I know not how or
why it was--its evident fondness for myself rather disgusted and annoyed
me. By slow degrees these feelings of disgust and annoyance rose into
the bitterness of hatred. I avoided the creature; a certain sense of
shame, and the remembrance of my former deed of cruelty, preventing me
from physically abusing it. I did not, for some weeks, strike, or
otherwise violently ill use it; but gradually--very gradually--I came to
look upon it with unutterable loathing, and to flee silently from its
odious presence, as from the breath of a pestilence.

What added, no doubt, to my hatred of the beast, was the discovery, on
the morning after I brought it home, that, like Pluto, it also had been
deprived of one of its eyes. This circumstance, however, only endeared
it to my wife, who, as I have already said, possessed, in a high degree,
that humanity of feeling which had once been my distinguishing trait,
and the source of many of my simplest and purest pleasures.

With my aversion to this cat, however, its partiality for myself seemed
to increase. It followed my footsteps with a pertinacity which it would
be difficult to make the reader comprehend. Whenever I sat it would
crouch beneath my chair or spring upon my knees, covering me with its
loathsome caresses. If I arose to walk it would get between my feet, and
thus nearly throw me down, or, fastening its long and sharp claws in my
dress, clamber, in this manner, to my breast. At such times, although I
longed to destroy it with a blow, I was yet withheld from so doing,
partly by a memory of my former crime, but chiefly--let me confess it at
once--by absolute dread of the beast.

This dread was not exactly a dread of physical evil--and yet I should be
at a loss how otherwise to define it. I am almost ashamed to own--yes,
even in this felon’s cell, I am almost ashamed to own--that the terror
and horror with which the animal inspired me had been heightened by one
of the merest chimeras it would be possible to conceive. My wife had
called my attention more than once, to the character of the mark of
white hair, of which I have spoken, and which

[Illustration: “_The figure of a gigantic cat._”]

constituted the sole visible difference between the strange beast and
the one I had destroyed. The reader will remember that this mark,
although large, had been originally very indefinite; but, by slow
degrees--degrees nearly imperceptible, and which for a long time my
reason struggled to reject as fanciful--it had, at length, assumed a
rigorous distinctness of outline. It was now the representation of an
object that I shudder to name--and for this, above all, I loathed and
dreaded, and would have rid myself of the monster had I dared--it was
now I say the image of a hideous, of a ghastly thing--of the gallows!
Oh, mournful and terrible engine of horror and of crime--of agony and of
death!

And now was I indeed wretched beyond the wretchedness of mere humanity.
And a brute beast, whose fellow I had contemptuously destroyed--a brute
beast to work out for me--for me, a man, fashioned in the image of the
High God--so much of insufferable woe. Alas! neither by day nor night
knew I the blessing of rest any more. During the former the creature
left me no moment alone, and in the latter I started hourly from dreams
of unutterable fear, to find the hot breath of the thing upon my face,
and its vast weight--an incarnate nightmare that I had no power to shake
off--incumbent eternally upon my heart.

Beneath the pressure of torments such as these the feeble remnants of
the good within me succumbed. Evil thoughts became my sole
intimates--the darkest and most evil of thoughts. The moodiness of my
usual temper increased to hatred of all things and of all mankind;
while, from the sudden, frequent and ungovernable outbursts of a fury to
which I now blindly abandoned myself, my uncomplaining wife, alas! was
the most usual and the most patient of sufferers.

One day she accompanied me upon some household errand into the cellar of
the old building, which our poverty compelled us to inhabit. The cat
followed me down the steep stairs, and, nearly throwing me headlong,
exasperated me to madness. Uplifting an axe, and forgetting, in my
wrath, the childish dread which had hitherto stayed my hand, I aimed a
blow at the animal which, of course, would have proved instantly fatal
had it descended as I wished. But this blow was arrested by the hand of
my wife. Goaded, by the interference, into a rage more than demoniacal,
I withdrew my arm from her grasp, and buried the ax in her brain. She
fell dead upon the spot, without a groan.

This hideous murder accomplished, I set myself forthwith, and with
entire deliberation, to the task of concealing the body. I knew that I
could not remove it from the house, either by day or by night, without
the risk of being observed by the neighbors. Many projects entered my
mind. At one period I thought of cutting the corpse into minute
fragments and destroying them by fire. At another I resolved to dig a
grave for it in the floor of the cellar. Again, I deliberated about
casting it into the well in the yard--about packing it in a box, as if
merchandise, with the usual arrangements, and so getting a porter to
take it from the house. Finally I hit upon what I considered a far
better expedient than either of these. I determined to wall it up in the
cellar--as the monks of the middle ages are recorded to have walled up
their victims.

For a purpose such as this the cellar was well adapted. Its walls were
loosely constructed, and had lately been plastered throughout with a
rough plaster, which the dampness of the atmosphere had prevented from
hardening. Moreover, in one of the walls was a projection, caused by a
false chimney, or fireplace, that had been filled up, and made to
resemble the rest of the cellar. I made no doubt that I could readily
displace the bricks at this point, insert the corpse, and wall the whole
up as before, so that no eye could detect anything suspicious.

And in this calculation I was not deceived. By means of a crowbar I
easily dislodged the bricks, and, having carefully deposited the body
against the inner wall, I propped it in that position, while, with
little trouble, I relaid the whole structure as it originally stood.
Having

[Illustration: “_An extraordinary cat._”]

procured mortar, sand and hair with every possible precaution, I
prepared a plaster which could not be distinguished from the old, and
with this I very carefully went over the new brickwork. When I had
finished I felt satisfied that all was right. The wall did not present
the slightest appearance of having been disturbed. The rubbish on the
floor was picked up with the minutest care. I looked around triumphantly
and said to myself, “Here, at least, then, my labor has not been in
vain.”

My next step was to look for the beast which had been the cause of so
much wretchedness, for I had at length firmly resolved to put it to
death. Had I been able to meet with it at the moment there could have
been no doubt of its fate; but it appeared that the crafty animal had
been alarmed at the violence of my previous anger and forebore to
present itself in my present mood. It is impossible to describe or to
imagine the deep, the blissful sense of relief which the absence of the
detested creature occasioned in my bosom. It did not make its appearance
during the night--and thus, for one night at least since its
introduction into the house, I soundly and tranquilly slept--aye, slept,
even with the burden of murder upon my soul!

The second and the third day passed, and still my tormentor came not.
Once again I breathed as a free man. The monster, in terror, had fled
the premises forever! I should behold it no more! My happiness was
supreme! The guilt of my dark deed disturbed me but little. Some few
inquiries had been made, but these had been readily answered. Even a
search had been instituted--but, of course, nothing was to be
discovered. I looked upon my future felicity as secured.

Upon the fourth day of the assassination a party of the police came very
unexpectedly into the house and proceeded again to make a rigorous
investigation of the premises. Secure, however, in the inscrutability of
my place of concealment, I felt no embarrassment whatever. The officers
bade me accompany them in their search. They left no nook or corner
unexplored. At length, for the third or fourth time, they descended into
the cellar. I quivered not in a muscle. My heart beat as calmly as that
of one who slumbers in innocence. I walked the cellar from end to end. I
folded my arms upon my bosom and roamed easily to and fro. The police
were thoroughly satisfied and prepared to depart. The glee at my heart
was too strong to be restrained. I burned to say but one word, by way of
triumph, and to render doubly sure their assurance of my guiltlessness.

“Gentlemen,” I said at last, as the party ascended the steps, “I delight
to have allayed your suspicions. I wish you all health and a little
more courtesy. By the by, gentlemen, this--this is a very well
constructed house.” (In the rabid desire to say something easily I
scarcely knew what I uttered at all.) “I may say an excellently well
constructed house. These walls--are you going, gentlemen?--these walls
are solidly put together;” and here, through the mere frenzy of bravado,
I rapped heavily, with a cane which I held in my hand, upon that very
portion of the brickwork behind which stood the corpse of the wife of my
bosom.

But may God shield and deliver me from the fangs of the Arch Fiend! No
sooner had the reverberation of my blows sunk into silence than I was
answered by a voice from within the tomb!--by a cry, at first muffled
and broken, like the sobbing of a child, and then quickly swelling into
one long, loud and continuous scream, utterly anomalous and inhuman--a
howl!--a wailing shriek, half of horror and half of triumph, such as
might have arisen only out of hell, conjointly from the throats of the
damned in their agony and of the demons that exult in the damnation.

Of my own thoughts it is folly to speak. Swooning, I staggered to the
opposite wall. For an instant the party upon the stairs remained
motionless, through extremity of terror and of awe. In the next a dozen
stout arms were toiling at the wall. It fell bodily. The corpse, already
getting decayed and clotted with gore, stood erect before the eyes of
the spectators. Upon its head, with red, extended mouth and solitary eye
of fire, sat the hideous beast whose craft had seduced me into murder,
and whose informing voice had consigned me to the hangman. I had walled
the monster up within the tomb!




THE FLAYED HAND.

BY GUY DE MAUPASSANT.


One evening about eight months ago I met with some college comrades at
the lodgings of our friend Louis R. We drank punch and smoked, talked of
literature and art, and made jokes like any other company of young men.
Suddenly the door flew open, and one who had been my friend since
boyhood burst in like a hurricane.

“Guess where I come from?” he cried.

“I bet on the Mabille,” responded one. “No,” said another, “you are too
gay; you come from borrowing money, from burying a rich uncle, or from
pawning your watch.” “You are getting sober,” cried a third, “and, as
you scented the punch in Louis’ room, you came up here to get drunk
again.”

“You are all wrong,” he replied. “I come from P., in Normandy, where I
have spent eight days, and whence I have brought one of my friends, a
great criminal, whom I ask permission to present to you.”

With these words he drew from his pocket a long, black hand, from which
the skin had been stripped. It had been severed at the wrist. Its dry
and shriveled shape, and the narrow, yellowed nails still clinging to
the fingers, made it frightful to look upon. The muscles, which showed
that its first owner had been possessed of great strength, were bound in
place by a strip of parchment-like skin.

“Just fancy,” said my friend, “the other day they sold the effects of an
old sorcerer, recently deceased, well known in all the country. Every
Saturday night he used to go to witch gatherings on a broomstick; he
practised the white magic and the black, gave blue milk to the cows, and
made them wear tails like that of the companion of Saint Anthony. The
old scoundrel always had a deep affection for this hand, which, he said,
was that of a celebrated criminal, executed in 1736 for having thrown
his lawful wife head first into a well--for which I do not blame
him--and then hanging in the belfry the priest who had married him.
After this double exploit he went away, and, during his subsequent
career, which was brief but exciting, he robbed twelve travelers, smoked
a score of monks in their monastery, and made a seraglio of a convent.”

“But what are you going to do with this horror?” we cried.

“Eh! parbleu! I will make it the handle to my door-bell and frighten my
creditors.”

“My friend,” said Henry Smith, a big, phlegmatic Englishman, “I believe
that this hand is only a kind of Indian meat, preserved by a new
process; I advise you to make bouillon of it.”

“Rail not, messieurs,” said, with the utmost sang froid, a medical
student who was three-quarters drunk, “but if you follow my advice,
Pierre, you will give this piece of human debris Christian burial, for
fear lest its owner should come to demand it. Then, too, this hand has
acquired some bad habits, for you know the proverb, ‘Who has killed will
kill.’”

“And who has drank will drink,” replied the host as he poured out a big
glass of punch for the student, who emptied it at a draught and slid
dead drunk under the table. His sudden dropping out of the company was
greeted with a burst of laughter, and Pierre, raising his glass and
saluting the hand, cried:

“I drink to the next visit of thy master.”

Then the conversation turned upon other subjects, and shortly afterward
each returned to his lodgings.

       *       *       *       *       *

About two o’clock the next day, as I was passing Pierre’s door, I
entered and found him reading and smoking.

“Well, how goes it?” said I. “Very well,” he responded. “And your hand?”
“My hand? Did you not see it on the bell-pull? I put it there when I
returned home last night. But, apropos of this, what do you think? Some
idiot, doubtless to play a stupid joke on me, came ringing at my door
towards midnight. I demanded who was there, but as no one replied, I
went back to bed again, and to sleep.”

At this moment the door opened and the landlord, a fat and extremely
impertinent person, entered without saluting us.

“Sir,” said he, “I pray you to take away immediately that carrion which
you have hung to your bell-pull. Unless you do this I shall be compelled
to ask you to leave.”

“Sir,” responded Pierre, with much gravity, “you insult a hand which
does not merit it. Know you that it belonged to a man of high breeding?”

The landlord turned on his heel and made his exit, without speaking.
Pierre followed him, detached the hand and affixed it to the bell-cord
hanging in his alcove.

“That is better,” he said. “This hand, like the ‘Brother, all must die,’
of the Trappists, will give my thoughts a serious turn every night
before I sleep.”

At the end of an hour I left him and returned to my own apartment.

I slept badly the following night, was nervous and agitated, and several
times awoke with a start. Once I imagined, even, that a man had broken
into my room, and I sprang up and searched the closets and under the
bed. Towards six o’clock in the morning I was commencing to doze at
last, when a loud knocking at my door made me jump from my couch. It was
my friend Pierre’s servant, half dressed, pale and trembling.

“Ah, sir!” cried he, sobbing, “my poor master. Someone has murdered
him.”

I dressed myself hastily and ran to Pierre’s lodgings. The house was
full of people disputing together, and everything was in a commotion.
Everyone was talking at the same time, recounting and commenting on the
occurrence in all sorts of ways. With great difficulty I reached the
bedroom, made myself known to those guarding the door and was permitted
to enter. Four agents of police were standing in the middle of the
apartment, pencils in hand, examining every detail, conferring in low
voices and writing from time to time in their note-books. Two doctors
were in consultation by the bed on which lay the unconscious form of
Pierre. He was not dead, but his face was fixed in an expression of the
most awful terror. His eyes were open their widest, and the dilated
pupils seemed to regard fixedly, with unspeakable horror, something
unknown and frightful. His hands were clinched. I raised the quilt,
which covered his body from the chin downward, and saw on his neck,
deeply sunk in the flesh, the marks of fingers. Some drops of blood
spotted his shirt. At that moment one thing struck me. I chanced to
notice that the shriveled hand was no longer attached to the bell-cord.
The doctors had doubtless removed it to avoid the comments of those
entering the chamber where the wounded man lay, because the appearance
of this hand was indeed frightful. I did not inquire what had become of
it.

I now clip from a newspaper of the next day the story of the crime with
all the details that the police were able to procure:

“A frightful attempt was made yesterday on the life of young M. Pierre
B., student, who belongs to one of the best families in Normandy. He
returned home about ten o’clock in the evening, and excused his valet,
Bouvin, from further attendance upon him, saying that he felt fatigued
and was going to bed. Towards midnight Bouvin was suddenly awakened by
the furious ringing of his master’s bell. He was afraid, and lighted a
lamp and waited. The bell was silent about a minute, then rang again
with such vehemence that the domestic, mad with fright, flew from his
room to awaken the concierge, who ran to summon the police, and, at the
end of about fifteen minutes, two policemen forced open the door. A
horrible sight met their eyes. The furniture was overturned, giving
evidence of a fearful struggle between the victim and his assailant. In
the middle of the room, upon his back, his body rigid, with livid face
and frightfully dilated eyes, lay, motionless, young Pierre B., bearing
upon his neck the deep imprints of five fingers. Dr. Bourdean was called
immediately, and his report says that the aggressor must have been
possessed of prodigious strength and have had an extraordinarily thin
and sinewy hand, because the fingers left in the flesh of the victim
five holes like those from a pistol ball, and had penetrated until they
almost met. There is no clue to the motive of the crime or to its
perpetrator. The police are making a thorough investigation.”

The following appeared in the same newspaper next day:

“M. Pierre B., the victim of the frightful assault of which we published
an account yesterday, has regained consciousness after two hours of the
most assiduous care by Dr. Bourdean. His life is not in danger, but it
is strongly feared that he has lost his reason. No trace has been found
of his assailant.”

My poor friend was indeed insane. For seven months I visited him daily
at the hospital where we had placed him, but he did not recover the
light of reason. In his delirium strange words escaped him, and, like
all madmen, he had one fixed idea: he believed himself continually
pursued by a specter. One day they came for me in haste, saying he was
worse, and when I arrived I found him dying. For two hours he remained
very calm, then, suddenly, rising from his bed in spite of our efforts,
he cried, waving his arms as if a prey to the most awful terror: “Take
it away! Take it away! It strangles me! Help! Help!” Twice he made the
circuit of the room, uttering horrible screams, then fell face downward,
dead.

       *       *       *       *       *

As he was an orphan I was charged to take his body to the little village
of P., in Normandy, where his parents were buried. It was the place from
which he had arrived the evening he found us drinking punch in Louis
R.’s room, when he had presented to us the flayed hand. His body was
inclosed in a leaden coffin, and four days afterwards I walked sadly
beside the old cure, who had given him his first lessons, to the little
cemetery where they dug his grave. It was a beautiful day, and sunshine
from a cloudless sky flooded the earth. Birds sang from the blackberry
bushes where many a time when we were children we had stolen to eat the
fruit. Again I saw Pierre and myself creeping along behind the hedge and
slipping through the gap that we knew so well, down at the end of the
little plot where they bury the poor. Again we would return to the house
with cheeks and lips black with the juice of the berries we had eaten. I
looked at the bushes; they were covered with fruit; mechanically I
picked some and bore it to my mouth. The cure had opened his breviary,
and was muttering his prayers in a low voice. I heard at the end of the
walk the spades of the grave-diggers who were opening the tomb. Suddenly
they called out, the cure closed his book, and we went to see what they
wished of us. They had found a coffin; in digging a stroke of the
pickaxe had started the cover, and we perceived within a skeleton of
unusual stature, lying on its back, its hollow eyes seeming yet to
menace and defy us. I was troubled, I know not why, and almost afraid.

“Hold!” cried one of the men, “look there! One of the rascal’s hands has
been severed at the wrist. Ah, here it is!” and he picked up from beside
the body a huge withered hand, and held it out to us.

“See,” cried the other, laughing, “see how he glares at you, as if he
would spring at your throat to make you give him back his hand.”

“Go,” said the cure, “leave the dead in peace, and close the coffin. We
will make poor Pierre’s grave elsewhere.”

The next day all was finished, and I returned to Paris, after having
left fifty francs with the old cure for masses to be said for the repose
of the soul of him whose sepulchre we had troubled.




THE VENGEANCE OF A TREE.

BY ELEANOR F. LEWIS.


Through the windows of Jim Daly’s saloon, in the little town of C----,
the setting sun streamed in yellow patches, lighting up the glasses
scattered on the tables and the faces of several men who were gathered
near the bar. Farmers mostly they were, with a sprinkling of
shopkeepers, while prominent among them was the village editor, and all
were discussing a startling piece of news that had spread through the
town and its surroundings. The tidings that Walter Stedman, a laborer on
Albert Kelsey’s ranch, had assaulted and murdered his employer’s
daughter, had reached them, and had spread universal horror among the
people.

A farmer declared that he had seen the deed committed as he walked
through a neighboring lane, and, having always been noted for his
cowardice, instead of running to the girl’s aid, had hailed a party of
miners who were returning from their mid-day meal through a field near
by. When they reached the spot, however, where Stedman (as they
supposed) had done his black deed, only the girl lay there, in the
stillness of death. Her murderer had taken the opportunity to fly. The
party had searched the woods of the Kelsey estate, and just as they were
nearing the house itself the appearance of Walter Stedman, walking in a
strangely unsteady manner toward it, made them quicken their pace.

He was soon in custody, although he had protested his innocence of the
crime. He said that he had just seen the body himself on his way to the
station, and that when they had found him he was going to the house for
help. But they had laughed at his story and had flung him into the tiny,
stifling calaboose of the town.

What were their proofs? Walter Stedman, a young fellow of about
twenty-six, had come from the city to their quiet town, just when times
were at their hardest, in search of work. The most of the men living in
the town were honest fellows, doing their work faithfully, when they
could get it, and when they had socially asked Stedman to have a drink
with them, he had refused in rather a scornful manner. “That infernal
city chap,” he was called, and their hate and envy increased in strength
when Albert Kelsey had employed him in preference to any of themselves.
As time went on, the story of Stedman’s admiration for Margaret Kelsey
had gone afloat, with the added information that his employer’s
daughter had repulsed him, saying that she would not marry a common
laborer. So Stedman, when this news reached his employer’s ears, was
discharged, and this, then, was his revenge! For them, these proofs were
sufficient to pronounce him guilty.

Yet that afternoon, as Stedman, crouched on the floor of the calaboose,
grew hopeless in the knowledge that no one would believe his story, and
that his undeserved punishment would be swift and sure, a tramp,
boarding a freight car several miles from the town, sped away from the
spot where his crime had been committed, and knew that forever its
shadow would follow him.

From the tiny window of his prison Walter Stedman could see the red glow
of the heavens that betokened the setting of the sun. So the red sun of
his life was soon to set, a life that had been innocent of all crime,
and that now was to be ended for a deed that he had never committed.
Most prominent of all the visions that swept through his mind was that
of Margaret Kelsey, lying as he had first found her, fresh from the
hands of her murderer. But there was another of a more tender nature.
How long he and Margaret had tried to keep their secret, until Walter
could be promoted to a higher position, so that he could ask for her
hand with no fear of the father’s antagonism! Then came the remembrance
of an afternoon meeting between the two in the woods of the Kelsey
estate--how, just as they were parting, Walter had heard footsteps near
them, and, glancing sharply around, saw an evil, scowling, murderous
face peering through the brush. He had started toward it, but the owner
of the countenance had taken himself hurriedly off.

The gossiping townspeople had misconstrued this romance, and when Albert
Kelsey had heard of this clandestine meeting from the man who was later
on to appear as a leader of the mob, and that he had discharged Stedman,
they had believed that the young man had formally proposed and had been
rejected. But justice had gone wrong, as it had done innumerable times
before, and will again. An innocent man was to be hanged, even without
the comfort of a trial, while the man who was guilty was free to wander
where he would.

That autumn night the darkness came quickly, and only the stars did
their best to light the scene. A body of men, all masked, and having as
a leader one who had ever since Stedman’s arrival in town, cherished a
secret hatred of the young man, dragged Stedman from the calaboose and
tramped through the town, defying all, defying even God himself. Along
the highway, and into Farmer Brown’s “cross cut,” they went, vigilantly
guarding their prisoner, who, with the lanterns lighting up his haggard
face, walked among them with the lagging step of utter hopelessness.

“That’s a good tree,” their leader said, presently, stopping and
pointing out a spreading oak; when the slipknot was adjusted and Stedman
had stepped on the box, he added: “If you’ve got anything to say, you’d
better say it now.”

“I am innocent, I swear before God,” the doomed man answered; “I never
took the life of Margaret Kelsey.”

“Give us your proof,” jeered the leader, and when Stedman kept a
despairing silence, he laughed shortly.

“Ready, men!” he gave the order. The box was kicked aside, and
then--only a writhing body swung to and fro in the gloom.

In front of the men stood their leader, watching the contortions of the
body with silent glee. “I’ll tell you a secret, boys,” he said suddenly.
“I was after that poor murdered girl myself. A d---- little chance I
had; but, by ----, he had just as little!”

A pause--then: “He’s shunted this earth. Cut him down, you fellows!”

       *       *       *       *       *

“It’s no use, son. I’ll give up the blasted thing as a bad job. There’s
something queer about that there tree. Do you see how its branches
balance it? We have cut the trunk nearly in two, but it won’t come down.
There’s plenty of others around; we’ll take one of them. If I’d a long
rope with me I’d get that tree down, and yet the way the thing stands it
would be risking a fellow’s life to climb it. It’s got the devil in it,
sure.”

So old Farmer Brown shouldered his axe and made for another tree, his
son following. They had sawed and chopped and chopped and sawed, and yet
the tall white oak, with its branches jutting out almost as regularly as
if done by the work of a machine, stood straight and firm.

Farmer Brown, well known for his weak, cowardly spirit, who in beholding
the murder of Albert Kelsey’s daughter, had in his fright mistaken the
criminal, now in his superstition let the oak stand, because its
well-balanced position saved it from falling, when other trees would
have been down. And so this tree, the same one to which an innocent man
had been hanged, was left--for other work.

It was a bleak, rainy night--such a night as can be found only in
central California. The wind howled like a thousand demons, and lashed
the trees together in wild embraces. Now and then the weird “hoot,
hoot!” of an owl came softly from the distance in the lulls of the
storm, while the barking of coyotes woke the echoes of the hills into
sounds like fiendish laughter.

In the wind and rain a man fought his path through the bush and into
Farmer Brown’s “cross cut,” as the shortest way home. Suddenly he
stopped, trembling, as if held by some unseen impulse. Before him rose
the white oak, wavering and swaying in the storm.

“Good God! it’s the tree I swung Stedman from!” he cried, and a strange
fear thrilled him.

His eyes were fixed on it, held by some undefinable fascination. Yes,
there on one of the longest branches a small piece of rope still
dangled. And then, to the murderer’s excited vision, this rope seemed to
lengthen, to form at the end into a slipknot, a knot that encircled a
purple neck, while below it writhed and swayed the body of a man!

“Damn him!” he muttered, starting toward the hanging form, as if about
to help the rope in its work of strangulation; “will he forever follow
me? And yet he deserved it, the black-hearted villain! He took her
life----”

He never finished the sentence. The white oak, towering above him in its
strength, seemed to grow like a frenzied, living creature. There was a
sudden splitting sound, then came a crash, and under the fallen tree lay
Stedman’s murderer, crushed and mangled.

From between the broken trunk and the stump that was left, a gray, dim
shape sprang out, and sped past the man’s still form, away into the wild
blackness of the night.




THE PARLOR-CAR GHOST.


All draped with blue denim--the seaside cottage of my friend, Sara Pyne.
She asked me to go there with her when she opened it to have it set in
order for the summer. She confessed that she felt a trifle nervous at
the idea of entering it alone. And I am always ready for an excursion.
So much blue denim rather surprised me, because blue is not
complimentary to Sara’s complexion--she always wears some shade of red,
by preference. She perceived my wonder; she is very near-sighted, and
therefore sees everything by some sort of sixth sense.

“You do not like my portieres and curtains and table-covers,” said she.
“Neither do I. But I did it to accommodate. And now he rests well in his
grave, I hope.”

“Whose grave, for pity’s sake?”

“Mr. J. Billington Price’s.”

“And who is he? He doesn’t sound interesting.”

“Then I will tell you about him,” said Sara, taking a seat directly in
front of one of those curtains. “Last autumn I was leaving this place
for New York, traveling on the fast express train known as the Flying
Yankee. Of course, I thought of the Flying Dutchman and Wagner’s musical
setting of the uncanny legend, and how different things are in these
days of steam, etc. Then I looked out of the window at the landscape,
the horizon that seemed to wheel in a great curve as the train sped on.
Every now and then I had an impression at the ‘tail of the eye’ that a
man was sitting in a chair three or four numbers in front of me on the
opposite side of the car. Each time that I saw this shape I looked at
the chair and ascertained that it was unoccupied. But it was an odd
trick of vision. I raised my lorgnette, and the chair showed emptier
than before. There was nobody in it, certainly. But the more I knew that
it was vacant the more plainly I saw the man. Always with the corner of
my eye. It made me nervous. When passengers entered the car I dreaded
lest they might take that seat. What would happen if they should? A bag
was put in the chair--that made me uncomfortable. The bag was removed at
the next station. Then a baby was placed in the seat. It began to laugh
as though someone had gently tickled it. There was something odd about
that chair--thirteen was its number. When I looked away from it the
impression was strong upon me that some person sitting there was
watching me.

“Really, it would not do to humor such fancies. So I touched the
electric button, asked the porter to bring me a table, and taking from
my bag a pack of cards, proceeded to divert myself with a game of
patience. I was puzzling where to put a seven of spades. ‘Where can it
go?’ I murmured to myself. A voice behind me prompted: ‘Play the four of
diamonds on the five, and you can do it.’ I started. The only occupants
of the car, besides me, were a bridal couple, a mother with three little
children, and a typical preacher of one of the straitest sects. Who had
spoken? ‘Play up the four, madam,’ repeated this voice.

“I looked fearfully over my shoulder. At first I saw a bluish cloud,
like cigar smoke, but inodorous. Then the vision cleared, and I saw a
young man whom I knew by a subtle intuition to be the occupant, seen and
not seen, of chair number thirteen. Evidently he was a traveling
salesman--and a ghost. Of course, a drummer’s ghost sounds
ridiculous--they’re so extremely alive! Or else you would expect a dead
drummer to be particularly dead and not ‘walk.’ This was a most
commonplace-looking ghost, cordial, pushing, businesslike. At the same
time, his face had an expression of utter despair and horror which made
him still more preposterous. Of course it is not nice to let a stranger
speak to one, even on so impersonal a topic as a four of diamonds. But a
ghost--there can’t be any rule of etiquette about talking with a ghost!
My dear, it was dreadful! That forward creature showed me how to play
all the cards, and then begged me to lay them out again, in order that
he might give me some clever points. I was too much amazed and disturbed
to speak. I could only place the cards at his suggestion. This I did so
as not to appear to be listening to the empty air, and be supposed to be
a crazy woman. Presently the ghost spoke again, and told me his story.

“‘Madam,’ he said, ‘I have been riding back and forth on this car ever
since February 22, 189--. Seven months and eleven days. All this time I
have not exchanged a word with anyone. For a drummer, that is pretty
hard, you may believe! You know the story of the Flying Dutchman? Well,
that is very nearly my case. A curse is upon me and will not be removed
until some kind soul----. But I’m getting ahead of my text. That day
there were four of us, traveling for different houses. One of the boys
was in wool, one in baking powder, one in boots and shoes, and myself in
cotton goods. We met on the road, took seats together and fell into
talking shop.

“‘Those fellows told big lies about their sales, Washington’s Birthday
though it was. The baking powder man raised the amount of the bills of
goods which he had sold better than a whole can of his stuff could have
done. I admitted the straight truth, that I had not yet been able to
make a sale. And then I swore--not in a light-minded, chipper style of
verbal trimmings, but a great, round, heaven-defying oath--that I would
sell a case of blue denims on that trip if it took me forever. We became
dry with talk, and when the train stopped at Rivermouth, we went out to
have some beer. It is good there, you know--pardon me, I forgot that I
was speaking to a lady. Well, we had to run to get aboard. I missed my
footing, fell under the wheels, and the next thing that I knew they were
holding an inquest over my remains; while I, disemboweled, was sitting
on a corner of the undertaker’s table, wondering which of the coroner’s
jury was likely to want a case of blue denims.

“‘Then I remembered my wicked oath, and understood that I was a soul
doomed to wander until I could succeed in selling that bill of goods. I
spoke once or twice, offering the denims under value, but nobody noticed
me. Verdict: accidental death; negligence of deceased; railroad
corporation not to blame; deceased got out for beer at his own risk. The
other drummers took charge of the remains, and wrote a beautiful letter
to my relatives about my social qualities and my impressive
conversation. I wish it had been less impressive that time! I might have
lied about my sales, or I might have said that I hoped for better luck.
But after that oath there was nothing for it. Back and forth, back and
forth, on this road, in chair number thirteen, to all eternity. Nobody
suspects my presence. They sit on my knees--I’m playing in luck when it
is a nice baby as it was this afternoon! They pile wraps, bags, even
railway literature on me. They play cards under my nose--and what
duffers some of them are! You, madam, are the first person who has
perceived me; and therefore I ventured to speak to you, meaning no
offense. I can see that you are sorry for me. Now, if you recall the
story of the Flying Dutchman, he was saved by the charity of a good
woman. In fact, Senta married him. Now I’m not asking anything of that
size. I see that you wear a wedding ring, and no doubt you make some
man’s happiness. I wasn’t a marrying man myself, and, naturally, am not
a marrying ghost. And that has nothing to do with the matter anyway. But
if you could--I don’t suppose you would have any use for them--but if
you were disposed to do a turn of good, solid, Christian charity--I
should be everlastingly grateful, and you may have that case of denims
at $72.50. And that quality is quoted to-day at $80. Does it go, madam?’

“The speech of the poor ghost was not very eloquent, but his eyes had an
intense, eager glare, which was terrible. Something--pity, fear, I do
not know what--compelled me. I decided to do without that white and gold
evening cloak. Instead, I gave $72.50 to the ghost and took from him a
receipt for the sum, signed J. Billington Price. Then he smiled
contentedly, thanked me with emotion, and returned to chair number
thirteen. Several times on the journey, although I did not perceive him
again, I felt dazed. When the train arrived at New York, and I, with the
other passengers, dismounted, it seemed to me that a strong hand passed
under my elbow, steadying me down the steps. As I walked the length of
the station my bag--not heavy at any time--appeared to become
weightless. I believe that the parlor-car ghost walked beside me,
carrying the bag, whose handle still remained in my other hand. Indeed,
once or twice I thought I felt the touch of cold fingers against mine.
Since then I have no reason to suppose that the poor ghost is not at
rest. I hope he is.

“But I never expected nor wished for the blue denims. The next day,
however, a dray belonging to a great wholesale house backed up to our
door and delivered a case of denims, with a receipted bill for the same.
What was I to do? I could not go about selling blue denims; I could not
give them away without exciting comment. So I furnished the cottage with
them--and you know the effect on my complexion. Pity me, dear! And
credit me, frivolous woman as I am, with having saved a soul at the
expense of my own vanity. My story is told. What do you think about
it?”




GHOST OF BUCKSTOWN INN.

BY ARNOLD M. ANDERSON.


Several travel-worn drummers sat in the lobby exchanging yarns. It was
Rodney Green’s turn, and he looked wise and began his tale.

“I don’t claim, by any means, that the belief in ghosts is a general
thing in Arkansas, but I do say that I had an experience out there a few
years ago.

“It was late in the fall, and I happened to be in the village of
Buckstown, which desecrates a very limited portion of the State. The
town is about as small and dirty a place as ever I saw, and the
Buckstown Inn is not much above the general character of the place. The
region is inhabited by natives who still cling to all sorts of foolish
superstitions. The inn, in the ante-bellum days, was kept by one who was
said to be the meanest and most crabbed of mortals. The old demon was as
miserly as he was mean, and all his narrow life he hoarded his filthy
lucre with fiendish greed. Report had it also that he had even murdered
his patrons in their beds for their money. What the facts actually were
I don’t know, but even to this day the old inn is held in suspicion. A
lingering effect of former horrors still clouds its memory.

“The present proprietor, Bunk Watson--his real name is Bunker, I
believe--is an altogether different sort of chap--a Southern type, in
fact--one of those shiftless, heedless, happy-go-lucky mortals who loves
strong whiskey and who chews an enormous quid of black tobacco and
smokes a corncob pipe at the same time.

“When the former keeper ‘shuffled off,’ his property fell to a distant
relative, the present keeper, who, with his family, immediately moved in
from a neighboring hamlet and took possession. It was well known that
the old proprietor had accumulated considerable wealth during his
sojourn among the living, but all efforts to discover any treasure upon
the premises had failed, and now the idea of ever finding it was
practically given up. As far as Bunk was concerned, the matter troubled
him little. He had a hard-working wife who ran things the best she could
under the circumstances, and saw that his meals were forthcoming at
their respective intervals. What more could he wish? Why should he care
if there was a treasure buried upon his place? Indeed, it would have
been a sore puzzle for him to know what to do with a fortune unless
perhaps his wife came to his aid.

“Among the stories that hovered in the history of the Buckstown Inn was
one which involved a ghost. In the room where the former keeper had died
peculiar noises were heard at unearthly hours: sighing, moaning, and, in
fact, all the other indications which point to the existence of ghosts,
were said to be present. On account of this the chamber had long since
been abandoned.

“I listened with keen interest to the wonderful tales about the haunted
room, and then suddenly resolved to investigate--to sleep in that
chamber that very night and see for myself all that was to be seen. I
told Buck of my purpose. He shook his head, shrugged his shoulders, but
instead of warning me and offering a flood of protests, as I expected,
he merely took his pipe from his mouth, let fly a quart or so of
yellowish juice from between a pair of brown-stained lips, and, opening
one corner of his wide mouth, lazily called out: ‘Jane.’ His wife
appeared, and he intimated that I should settle the matter with the ‘old
woman.’ The prospect of a fee persuaded the wife, and off she went to
arrange for my bed in that ill-fated room.

“At nine o’clock that evening I bid the family good-night, took my
candle, ascended the rickety stairs and entered the chamber of horrors.
The atmosphere was heavy and had a peculiar odor that was not at all
pleasing. However, I latched the door and was soon in bed. Having
propped myself up with pillows, I was prepared to await the coming of
the ghost.

“Overhead the dusty rafters, which once had experienced the sensation of
being whitewashed, but which were now a dirty, yellowish color, were
hung with a fantastic array of cobwebs. The flickering light of the
candle reflected upon the walls and against the ceiling a pyramid of
grotesque shapes, and with this effect being continually disturbed by
the swaying cobwebs, the whole caused the room to appear rather ghostly
after all, and especially so to an imaginative mind.

“I waited and waited for hours, it seemed, but still no ghost. Perhaps
it was afraid of my candle light, so I blew it out. No sooner had I done
this and settled back in bed again than a white hand appeared through
the door, then a whole figure--at last the ghost had come, a white and
sheeted ghost!

“It had come right through the door, although it was locked, and now it
advanced toward the bed. Raising its long, white arm, it pointed a bony
finger at me, and then commanded: ‘Come with me!’ Thereupon it turned to
the door, while instantly I jumped out of bed to follow. Some unseen
power compelled me to obey. The door flew open and the ghost led me down
the stairs, through long halls into the cellar, through mysterious
underground corridors, upstairs again, in and out rooms which I never
dreamed were to be found in that old rambling inn. Finally, through a
small door in the rear, we left the house. I was in my sleeping
garments, but no matter, I had to follow.

“The white form, with a slow and measured tread and as silent as death,
led the way into the orchard. There, under a tree at the farther end, it
pointed to the ground, and in the same ghostly tones before used, said:

“‘Here you will find a great treasure buried.’

“The ghost then disappeared, and I saw it no more. I stood dazed and
trembling. Upon recovering my wits I started to dig, but the chill of
the night air and the scantiness of my night robes made such labor
impracticable. So I decided to leave some mark to identify the place and
come around again at daybreak. I reached up and broke off a limb.
Overcome with my night’s exertions I slept the next morning until a loud
rapping on my door and a croaking voice warned me that it was noon.

“I had intended to leave Buckstown Inn that day, but, prompted by
curiosity and anxious to investigate, I unpacked my gripsack for a
comfortable stay.

“You must understand that this was my first experience with a ghost, and
I feared I might never see another.

“At breakfast my landlady waited on me in silence, though once I
detected her eyes following me with a peculiar expression. She wanted to
ask me how I enjoyed the night, but I would not gratify her by
volunteering a word.

“My host was more outspoken.

“‘Reckon ye didn’t get much sleep,’ said he, with a queer smile.

“‘Did you hear anything?’ I asked.

“‘Well, I did--ye-es,’ he said, with a drawl. ‘But ye didn’t disturb me
any. I knew ye’d hev trouble when ye went in thet room ter sleep.’

“That afternoon I slipped out to the tree. But to my amazement I found
that the twig I had broken from the branches was gone. Finally I found
under the lower trunk of an apple tree an open place from which a small
branch had evidently been wrested. But on looking further, I discovered
that every apple tree in the orchard had been similarly disfigured.

“‘More mysterious than ever,’ I said; ‘but to-night shall decide.’

“That night I pleaded weariness, which no one seemed inclined to
question, and sought my couch earlier.

“‘Goin’ ter try it again?’ asked my host.

“‘Yes; and I’ll stay all winter but what I’ll get even with that ghost,’
I said.

“That night I kept the candle burning until midnight, when I blew it
out.

“Instantly the room was flooded with a soft light, and at the foot of
the bed stood my ghost, the identical ghost of last night.

“Again the bony finger beckoned and a sepulchral voice whispered,
‘Follow me!’ I sprang from the bed, but the figure darted ahead of me.
It flew through the doorway and down the stairs, and I after it. At the
foot of the staircase an unseen hand reached forward and caught my foot
and I fell sprawling headlong.

“But in a second I was on my feet and pursuing the ghost. It had gained
on me a few yards, but I was quicker, and just as we reached the outside
door I nearly touched its robes. They sent a chill through my frame, and
I nearly gave up the pursuit.

“As it passed through the doorway it turned and gave me one look, and I
caught the same malignant light in its eyes that I remembered from the
night before.

“In the open orchard I felt sure I could catch it.

“But my ghost had no intention of allowing me any such opportunity. To
my disgust, it darted backward and into the house, slamming the door in
my face.

“In my frenzy of fear and chagrin I threw myself against the oaken door
with such force that its rusty old hinges yielded and I landed in the
big front room of the inn just in time to see the white skirts of the
ghost flit up the stairs.

“Upstairs I flew after it, and into an old chamber. There, huddled in a
corner, I saw it. In the minute’s delay it had secured a lighted candle
and, as I entered, it advanced to daunt me with bony arm upraised to a
great height.

“‘Caught!’ I cried, throwing my arms around the figure. And I had made
the acquaintance of a real live ghost.

“The white robes fell, and I saw revealed my hostess of Buckstown Inn.

“Next morning, when I threatened to call the police, she confessed to me
that she masqueraded as a ghost to draw visitors to the out-of-the-way
old place, and that she found its tale of being haunted highly
profitable to her.”




THE BURGLAR’S GHOST.


I am not an imaginative man, and no one who knows me can say that I have
ever indulged in sentimental ideas upon any subject. I am rather
predisposed, in fact, to look at everything from a purely practical
standpoint, and this quality has been further developed in me by the
fact that for twenty years I have been an active member of the detective
police force at Westford, a large town in one of our most important
manufacturing districts. A policeman, as most people will readily
believe, has to deal with so much practical life that he has small
opportunity for developing other than practical qualities, and he is
more apt to believe in tangible things than in ideas of a somewhat
superstitious nature. However, I was once under the firm conviction that
I had been largely helped up the ladder of life by the ghost of a once
well-known burglar. I have told the story to many, and have heard it
commented upon in various fashions. Whether the comments were satirical
or practical, it made no difference to me; I had a firm faith at that
time in the truth of my tale.

Eighteen years ago I was a plain clothes officer at Westford. I was then
twenty-three years of age, and very anxious about two matters. First and
foremost I desired promotion; second, I wished to be married. Of course
I was more eager about the second than the first, because my sweetheart,
Alice Moore, was one of the prettiest and cleverest girls in the town;
but I put promotion first for the simple reason that with me promotion
must come before marriage. Knowing this, I was always on the lookout for
a chance of distinguishing myself, and I paid such attention to my
duties that my superiors began to notice me, and foretold a successful
career for me in the future.

One evening in the last week of September, 1873, I was sitting in my
lodgings wondering what I could do to earn the promotion which I so
earnestly wished for. Things were quiet just then in Westford, and I am
afraid I half wished that something dreadful might occur if I only could
have a share in it. I was pursuing this train of thought when I suddenly
heard a voice say, “Good evening, officer.”

I turned sharply around. It was almost dusk and my lamp was not lighted.
For all that, I could see clearly enough a man who was sitting by a
chest of drawers that stood between the door and the window. His chair
stood between the drawers and the door, and I concluded that he had
quietly entered my room and seated himself before addressing me.

“Good evening!” I replied. “I didn’t hear you come in.”

He laughed when I said that--a low, chuckling, rather sly laugh. “No,”
he said, “I dessay not, officer. I’m a very quiet sort of person. You
might say, in fact, noiseless. Just so.”

I looked at him narrowly, feeling considerably surprised and astonished
at his presence. He was a thickly built man, with a square face and
heavy chin. His nose was small, but aggressive; his eyes were little and
overshadowed by heavy eyebrows; I could see them twinkle when he spoke.
As for his dress, it was in keeping with his face.

He wore a rough suit of woolen or frieze; a thick, gayly colored Belcher
neckerchief encircled his bull-like throat, and in his big hands he
continually twirled and twisted a fur cap, made apparently out of the
skin of some favorite dog. As he sat there smiling at me and saying
nothing, it made me feel uncomfortable.

“What do you want with me?” I asked.

“Just a little matter o’ business,” he answered.

“You should have gone to the office,” I said. “We’re not supposed to do
business at home.”

“Right you are, guv’nor,” he replied; “but I wanted to see you. It’s you
that’s got to do my job. If I’d ha’ seen the superintendent he might
ha’ put somebody else on to it. That wouldn’t ha’ suited me. You see,
officer, you’re young, and nat’rally eager-like for promotion. Eh?”

“What is it you want?” I inquired again.

“Ain’t you eager to be promoted?” he reiterated. “Ain’t you now,
officer?”

I saw no reason why I should conceal the fact, even from this strange
visitor. I admitted that I was eager for promotion.

“Ah!” he said, with a satisfied smile; “I’m glad o’ that. It’ll make you
all the keener. Now, officer, you listen to me. I’m a-goin’ to put you
on to a nice little job. Ah! I dessay you’ll be a sergeant before long,
you will. You’ll be complimented and praised for your clever conduck in
this ’ere affair. Mark my words if you ain’t.”

“Out with it,” I said, fancying I saw through the man’s meaning. “You’re
going to split on some of your pals, I suppose, and you’ll want a
reward.”

He shook his head. “A reward,” he said, “wouldn’t be no use to me at
all--no, not if it was a thousand pounds. No, it ain’t nothing to do
with reward. But now, officer, did you ever hear of Light Toed Jim?”

Light Toed Jim! I should have been a poor detective if I had not. Why,
the man known under that sobriquet was one of the cleverest burglars and
thieves in England, and had enjoyed such a famous career that his name
was a household word. At that moment there was an additional interest
attached to him. He had been convicted of burglary at the Northminster
assizes in 1871, and sentenced to ten years’ penal servitude. After
serving nearly two years of his time he had escaped from Portland,
getting away in such clever fashion that he had never been heard of
since. Where he was no one could say; but lately there had been a strong
suspicion among the police that Light Toed Jim was at his old tricks
again.

“Light Toed Jim!” I repeated. “I should think so. Why, what do you know
about him?”

He smiled and nodded his head. “Light Toed Jim,” said he, “is in
Westford at this ’ere hidentical moment. Listen to me, officer. Light
Toed Jim is a-goin’ to crack a crib to-night. Said crib is the mansion
of Miss Singleton, that ’ere rich old lady as lives out on the Mapleton
Road. You know her--awfully rich, with naught but women servants and
animals about the place. There’s some very valyable plate there. That’s
what Light Toed Jim’s after. He’ll get in through the scullery window
about 1 a. m., then he’ll pass through the back and front kitchens and
into the butler’s pantry--only it’s a butleress, ’cos there ain’t no men
at all--and there he’ll set to work on the safe. Some of his late pals
in Portland give him the tip about this ’ere job.”

“How did you come to hear of it?” I asked.

“Never mind, guv’nor. You wouldn’t understand. Now, I wants you to be up
there to-night and to nab Light Toed Jim red-handed, so to speak. It’ll
mean promotion for you, and it’ll suit me down to the ground. You wants
to be about and to watch him enter. Then follow him and dog him. And be
armed, officer, for Jim’ll fight like a tiger if you don’t draw his
teeth first.”

“Now, look here, my man,” said I, “this is all very well, but it’s all
irregular. You must just tell me who you are and how you come to be in
Light Toed Jim’s secrets, and I’ll put it down in black and white.”

I turned away from him to get my writing materials. I was not half a
minute with my back to him, but when I turned round he was gone. The
door was shut, but I had heard no sound from it either opening or
shutting. Quick as thought I darted to it, tore it wide open, and looked
down the narrow staircase. There was no one there. I ran hastily
downstairs into the passage, and found my landlady, Mrs. Marriner,
standing at the open door with a female friend. “Mrs. Marriner,” I said,
breaking in upon their conversation, “which way did that man go who came
downstairs just now?”

Mrs. Marriner looked at me strangely. “There ain’t been no man come
downstairs, Mr. Parker,” said she; “leastways, not this good
three-quarters of an hour, which me and Missis Higgins ’ere, as ’ave
come out to take an airing, her having been ironin’ all this blessed
day, has been standin’ ’ere all the time and ain’t never seen a soul.”

“Nonsense,” I said. “A man came down from my room just now--the man you
sent up twenty minutes since.”

Mrs. Marriner looked at me with an expression betokening the most
profound astonishment. Mrs. Higgins sighed deeply.

“Mr. Parker,” said Mrs. Marriner, “sorry am I to say it, sir, but you’re
either intoxicated or else you’re a-sickening for brain fever, sir.
There ain’t no person entered this door, in or out, for nigh onto an
hour, as me and Missis Higgins ’ere will take our Bible oaths on.”

I went upstairs and looked in the rooms on either side of mine. The man
was not there. I looked under my bed, and of course he was not there. He
must have gone downstairs. But then the women must have seen him. There
was only one door to the house. I gave it up in despair and began to
smoke my pipe. By the time I had drawn the last whiff I decided that if
anyone was “intoxicated,” it was probably Mrs. Marriner and Mrs.
Higgins, and that my strange visitor had departed by the door. I was not
going to believe that he had anything supernatural about him.

I had no duty that night, and as the hours wore on I found myself stern
in my resolve to go up to Miss Singleton’s house and see what I could
make out of my informant’s story. It was my opinion that my late visitor
was a whilom “pal” of Light Toed Jim, and that having become aware of
the latter’s plot, he had, for some reason of his own, decided to split
on his old chum. Thieves’ disagreement is an honest man’s opportunity,
and I determined to solve the truth of the story told me. Lest it should
come to nothing, I decided not to report the matter to my chief. If I
could really capture Light Toed Jim, my success would be all the more
brilliant by being suddenly sprung upon the authorities.

I made my plan of action rapidly. I took a revolver with me and went up
to Miss Singleton’s house. Fortunately, I knew the housekeeper there--a
middle-aged, strong-minded woman, not easily frightened, which was a
good thing. To her I communicated such information as I considered
necessary. She consented to conceal me in the room where the safe stood.
There was a cupboard close by the safe from which I could command a full
view of the burglar’s operations and pounce upon him at the right
moment. If only my information was to be relied upon, there was every
chance of my capturing the famous burglar.

Soon after midnight, when the house was all quiet, I went to the pantry
and got into the cupboard, locking myself in. There were two openings
in the panel, through either of which I was able to command a full view
of the room. My position was somewhat cramped, but the time soon passed
away. My mind was principally occupied in wondering if I was really
about to have a chance of distinguishing myself. Somehow, there was an
air of unreality about the events of the evening which puzzled me.

Suddenly I heard a sound which put me on the alert at once. It was
nothing more than the creaking of a board or opening of a door would
make in a quiet house; but it sounded intensified to my expectant ears.
I drew myself up against the door of the cupboard and placed my eye to
the opening in the panel. I had oiled the key of the door, and kept my
fingers upon it in readiness to spring upon the burglar at the proper
moment. After what seemed some time I saw the gleam of light through the
keyhole of the door opening into the pantry. Then it opened, and a man
carrying a small lantern came gently into the room. At first I could see
nothing of his face; but when my eyes grew accustomed to the hazy light
I saw that I had been rightly informed, and that the burglar was indeed
no other than the famous Light Toed Jim.

As I stood there watching him I could not help admiring the cool fashion
in which he went to work. He went over to the window and examined it. He
tried the door of the cupboard in which I stood concealed. Then he
locked the door of the pantry and turned his attention to the safe. He
set his lamp on a chair before the lock and took from his pocket as neat
and pretty a collection of tools as ever I saw. With these he went
quietly and swiftly to work.

Light Toed Jim was a somewhat slimly built fellow, with little muscular
development about him, while I am a big man with plenty of bone and
sinew. If matters had come to a fight between us I could have done what
I pleased with him; but I knew that Jim would not chance a fight.
Somewhere about him I felt sure there was a revolver, which he would use
on the least provocation. My plan, therefore, was to wait until his back
was bent over the lock of the safe, then to open the cupboard door
noiselessly and fall bodily upon him, pinning him to the ground beneath
me.

Before long the moment came. He was working steadily away at the lock,
his whole attention concentrated on the job. The slight noise of his
drill was sufficient to drown the faint click of the key in the cupboard
door. I turned it quickly and tumbled right upon him, driving the tool
out of his hands and tumbling him into a heap at the foot of the safe.
He uttered an exclamation of rage and astonishment as he went down, and
immediately began to wriggle under me like an eel. As I kept him down
with one hand I tried to pull out the handcuffs with the other. This
somewhat embarrassed me, and the burglar profited by it to pull out a
sharp knife. He had worked himself round on his back, and before I
realized what he was after he was hacking furiously at me with his keen,
dagger-like blade. Then I realized that we were going to have a fight
for it, and prepared myself. He tried to run the knife into my side. I
warded it off, but the blade caught the fleshy part of my left arm and I
felt a warm stream of blood spurt out.

That maddened me, and I seized one of the steel drills lying near at
hand, and hit my man such a blow over the temple that he collapsed at
once, and lay as if dead. I put the handcuffs on him instantly, and, to
make matters still more certain, I secured his ankles. Then I rose and
looked at my arm. The knife had made a nasty gash, and the blood was
flowing freely, but it was not serious; and when the housekeeper, who
had just then appeared on the scene, had bandaged it, I went out and
secured the help of the first policeman I met in conveying Light Toed
Jim to the office.

I felt a proud man when I made my report to the inspector.

“Light Toed Jim?” said he. “What, James Bland? Nonsense, Parker.” But I
took him to the cells where Jim was being attended to by the doctor.

“You’re right, Parker,” he said. “That’s the man. Well, this will be a
fine thing for you.”

After a time, feeling a little exhausted, I went home to try and get
some sleep. The surgeon had attended to my arm, and told me it was but a
superficial wound. It felt sore enough in spite of that.

I had no sooner reached my lodgings than I saw sitting in my easy-chair
the strange man who had called upon me earlier in the evening. He rose
to his feet when I entered. I stared at him in utter astonishment.

“Well, guv’nor,” said he, “I see you’ve done it. You’ve got him square
and fair, I reckon?”

“Yes,” I said.

“Ah!” he said, with a sigh of complete satisfaction. “Then I’m
satisfied. Yes, I don’t know as how there’s aught more I could say. I
reckon as how Light Toed Jim an’ me is quits.”

I was determined to find out who this man was this time. “Sit down,” I
said. “There’s a question or two I must ask you. Just let me get my coat
off and I’ll talk to you.” I took my coat off and went over to the bed
to lay it down. “Now then,” I began, and looked around at him. I said no
more, being literally struck dumb. The man was gone!

I began to feel uncomfortable. I ran hastily downstairs, only to find
the outer door locked and bolted, as I had left it a few minutes
before. I went back, utterly nonplussed. For an hour I pondered the
matter over, but could neither make head nor tail of it.

When I went down to the office next morning I was informed that the
burglar wanted to see me. I went to his cell, where he was lying in bed
with his head bandaged. I had hit him pretty hard, as it turned out, and
it was probable he would have to lie on the sick list for some days.
“Well, guv’nor,” said he, “you’d the best of me last night. You hit me
rather hard that time.”

“I was sorry to have to do it, my man,” I answered. “You would have
stabbed me if you could.”

“Yes,” he said, “I should. But I say, guv’nor, come a bit closer; I want
to ask you a question. How did you know I was on that little job last
night? For, s’elp me, there wasn’t a soul knew a breath about it but
myself. I hadn’t no pals, never talked to anybody about it, never
thought aloud about it, as I knows on. How came you to spot it,
guv’nor?”

There was no one else in the cell with us, and I thought I might find
out something about my mysterious visitor of the night before. “It was a
pal of yours who gave me the information,” I said.

“Can’t be, guv’nor. No use telling me that. I ain’t got no
pals--leastways not in this job.”

“Did you ever know a man like this?” I described my visitor. As I
proceeded, Light Toed Jim’s face assumed an expression of real terror.
Whatever color there was in it faded away. I never saw a man look more
thoroughly frightened. “Yes, yes,” he said, eagerly. “In course I know
who it is. Why, it’s Barksea Bill, as I pal’d with at one time--and what
did he say, guv’nor--that he owed me a grudge? That we was quits at
last? Right you are, ’cos he did owe me a grudge. I treated Bill very
shabby--very shabby, indeed, and he swore solemn he’d have his revenge.
On’y, guv’nor, what you see wasn’t Barksea Bill at all, but his ghost,
’cos Barksea Bill’s been dead and buried this three year.”

I was naturally very much exercised in my mind over this weird
development of the affair, and I used to think about it long after Light
Toed Jim had once more retired to the seclusion of Portland. While he
was in charge at Westford I tried more than once to worm some more
information out of him about the defunct Barksea Bill, but with no
success. He would say no more than that “Bill was dead and buried this
three year;” and with that I had to be content. Gradually I came to have
a firm belief that I had indeed been visited by Barksea Bill’s ghost,
and I often told the story to brother officers, and sometimes got well
laughed at. That, however, mattered little to me; I felt sure that any
man who had gone through the same experience would have had the same
beliefs.

Of course I got my promotion and was soon afterward married. Things went
well with me, and I was lifted from one step to another. In my secret
mind I was always sure I owed my first rise to the burglar’s ghost, and
I should have continued to think so but for an incident which occurred
just five years after my capture of Light Toed Jim.

I had occasion to travel to Sheffield from Westford, and had to change
trains at Leeds. The carriage I stepped into was occupied by a solitary
individual, who turned his face to me as I sat down. Though dressed in
more respectable fashion, I immediately recognized the man who had
visited me so mysteriously at my lodgings. My first feeling was one of
fear, and I daresay my face showed it, for the man laughed.

“Hallo, guv’nor,” said he; “I see you knew me as soon as you come in.
You owes a deal to me, guv’nor; now, don’t you, eh?”

“Look here, my man,” I said, “I’ve been taking you for a ghost these
five years past. Now just tell me how you got in and out of my room that
night, will you?”

He laughed long and loud at that. “A ghost?” said he. “Well, if that
ain’t a good un! Why, easy enough, guv’nor. I was a-lodging for a day or
two in the same house. It’s easy enough, when you know how, to open a
door very quiet and to slip out, too.”

“But I followed you sharp, and looked for you.”

“Ay, guv’nor; but you looked down, and I had gone up! You should ha’
come up to the attics, and there you’d ha’ found me. So you took me for
a ghost? Well, I’m blowed.”

I told him what Light Toed Jim had said in the cell.

“Ay,” said he, “I dessay, guv’nor. You see, ’twas this way--it weren’t
Jim’s fault as I wasn’t dead. He tried to murder me, guv’nor, he did,
and left me a-lying for dead. So I ses to myself when I comes round that
I’d pay him out sooner or later. But after that I quit the profession,
Jim’s nasty conduck havin’ made me sick of it. So I went in for honest
work at my old trade, which was draining and pipe repairing. I was on a
job o’ that sort in Westford, near Miss Singleton’s house, when I see
Light Toed Jim. I had a hidea what he was up to, havin’ heard o’ the
plate, and I watches him one or two nights, and gets a notion ’ow he was
going to work the job. Then, o’ course, you being a officer and close at
hand I splits on him--and that’s all.”

“But you had got the time and details correct?”

“Why, o’ course, guv’nor. I was an old hand--served many years at
Portland, I have, and I knew just how Jim would work it, after seeing
his perlim’nary observations. But a ghost! Ha, ha, ha! Why, guv’nor, you
must ha’ been a very green young officer in them days!”

Perhaps I was. At any rate I learned a lesson from the ci-devant Barksea
Bill--namely, that in searching a house it is always advisable to look
up as well as down.




A PHANTOM TOE.


I am not a superstitious man, far from it, but despite all my efforts to
the contrary I could not help thinking, directly I had taken a survey of
my chamber, that I should never quit it without going through a strange
adventure. There was something in its immense size, heaviness and gloom
that seemed to annihilate at one blow all my resolute skepticism as
regards supernatural visitations. It appeared to me totally impossible
to go into that room and disbelieve in ghosts.

The fact is, I had incautiously partaken at supper of that favorite
Dutch dish, sauerkraut, and I suppose it had disagreed with me and put
strange fancies into my head. Be this as it may I only know that after
parting with my friend for the night I gradually worked myself up into
such a state of fidgetiness that at last I wasn’t sure whether I hadn’t
become a ghost myself.

“Supposing,” ruminated I, “supposing the landlord himself should be a
practical robber and should have taken the lock and bolt from off this
door for the purpose of entering here in the dead of the night,
abstracting all my property, and perhaps murdering me! I thought the dog
had a very cutthroat air about him.” Now, I had never had any such idea
until that moment, for my host was a fat (all Dutchmen are fat),
stupid-looking fellow, who I don’t believe had sense enough to
understand what a robbery or murder meant, but somehow or other,
whenever we have anything really to annoy us (and it certainly was not
pleasant to go to bed in a strange place without being able to fasten
one’s door), we are sure to aggravate it by myriads of chimeras of our
own brain.

So, on the present occasion, in the midst of a thousand disagreeable
reveries, some of the most wild absurdity, I jumped very gloomily into
bed, having first put out my candle (for total darkness was far
preferable to its flickering, ghostly light, which transformed rather
than revealed objects), and soon fell asleep, perfectly tired out with
my day’s riding.

How long I lay asleep I don’t know, but I suddenly awoke from a
disagreeable dream of cutthroats, ghosts and long, winding passages in a
haunted inn. An indescribable feeling, such as I never before
experienced, hung upon me. It seemed as if every nerve in my body had a
hundred spirits tickling it, and this was accompanied by so great a heat
that, inwardly cursing mine host’s sauerkraut and wondering how the
Dutchmen could endure such poison, I was forced to sit up in bed to
cool myself. The whole of the room was profoundly dark, excepting at one
place, where the moonlight, falling through a crevice in the shutters,
threw a straight line of about an inch or so thick upon the
floor--clear, sharp and intensely brilliant against the darkness. I
leave you to conceive my horror when, upon looking at this said line of
light, I saw there a naked human toe--nothing more.

For the first instant I thought the vision must be some effect of
moonlight, then that I was only half awake and could not see distinctly.
So I rubbed my eyes two or three times and looked again. Still there was
the accursed thing--plain, distinct, immovable--marblelike in its
fixedness and rigidity, but in everything else horribly human.

I am not an easily frightened man. No one who has traveled so much and
seen so much and been exposed to so many dangers as I, can be, but there
was something so mysterious and unusual in the appearance of this single
toe that for a short time I could not think what to be at, so I did
nothing but stare at it in a state of utter bewilderment.

At length, however, as the toe did not vanish under my steady gaze, I
thought I might as well change my tactics, and remembering that all
midnight invaders, be they thieves, ghosts or devils, dislike nothing
so much as a good noise I shouted out in a loud voice:

“Who’s there?”

The toe immediately disappeared in the darkness.

Almost simultaneously with my words I leaped out of bed and rushed
toward the place where I had beheld the strange appearance. The next
instant I ran against something and felt an iron grip round my body.
After this I have no distinct recollection of what occurred, excepting
that a fearful struggle ensued between me and my unseen opponent; that
every now and then we were violently hurled to the floor, from which we
always rose again in an instant, locked in a deadly embrace; that we
tugged and strained and pulled and pushed, I in the convulsive and
frantic energy of a fight for life, he (for by this time I had
discovered that the intruder was a human being) actuated by some passion
of which I was ignorant; that we whirled round and round, cheek to cheek
and arm to arm, in fierce contest, until the room appeared to whiz round
with us, and that at least a dozen people (my fellow traveler among
them), roused, I suppose, by our repeated falls, came pouring into the
room with lights and showed me struggling with a man having nothing on
but a shirt, whose long, tangled hair and wild, unsettled eyes told me
he was insane. And then, for the first time, I became aware that I had
received in the conflict several gashes from a knife, which my opponent
still held in his hand.

To conclude my story in a few words (for I daresay all of you by this
time are getting very tired), it turned out that my midnight visitor was
a madman who was being conveyed to a lunatic asylum at The Hague, and
that he and his keeper had been obliged to stop at Delft on their way.
The poor fellow had contrived during the night to escape from his
keeper, who had carelessly forgotten to lock the door of his chamber,
and with that irresistible desire to shed blood peculiar to many insane
people had possessed himself of a pocketknife belonging to the man who
had charge of him, entered my room, which was most likely the only one
in the house unfastened, and was probably meditating the fatal stroke
when I saw his toe in the moonlight, the rest of his body being hidden
in the shade.

After this terrible freak of his he was watched with much greater
strictness, but I ought to observe, as some excuse for the keeper’s
negligence, that this was the first act of violence he had ever
attempted.




MRS. DAVENPORT’S GHOST.

BY FREDERICK F. SCHRADER.


Dear readers, do you agree with Hamlet? Do you believe that there is
more between heaven and earth than we dream of in our philosophy? Does
it seem possible to you that Eliphas Levy conjured up the shade of
Apollonius of Tyana, the prophet of the Magii, in a London hotel, and
that the great sage, William Crookes, drank his tea at breakfast several
days a week, for months in succession, in the society of the
materialized spirit of a young lady, attired in white linen, with a
feather turban on her head?

Do not laugh! Panic would seize you in the presence even of a turbaned
spirit, and the grotesque spectacle would but intensify your terror. As
for me, I did not laugh last night on reading an account in a New York
newspaper of a criminal trial that will probably terminate in the death
penalty of the accused.

It is a sad case. I shudder as I transcribe the records of the trial
from the testimony of the hotel waiter, who heard the conversation of
the two confederates through a keyhole, and of forty thoroughly
credible witnesses, who testified to the same facts. What would be my
feelings if I had seen the beautiful victim with the gaping wound in her
breast, into which she dipped her finger to mark the brow of her
murderer?


I.

About three o’clock on the afternoon of February 3, Professor Davenport
and Miss Ida Soutchotte, a very pale and delicate young girl, who had
submitted to the tests of Professor Davenport for a number of years,
were finishing their dinner in their room in the second story of a New
York hotel. Professor Benjamin Davenport was a celebrity, but it was
said that he owed his fame to somewhat questionable means. The leading
spiritualists did not repose the confidence in him that manifestly
marked their regard for William Crookes or Daniel Douglas Home.

“Greedy and unscrupulous mediums,” the author of Spiritualism in America
thinks, “are to blame for the most bitter attacks to which our cause has
been exposed. When the materializations do not take place as quickly as
circumstances require, they resort to trickery and fraud to extricate
themselves from a dilemma.”

Professor Benjamin Davenport belonged to these “versatile” mediums.
Aside from this, queer stories were afloat about him. He was secretly
accused of highway robbery in South America, cheating at cards in the
gambling houses of San Francisco, and the overhasty use of firearms
toward persons who had never offended him. It was said almost openly,
that the professor’s wife had died from abuse and grief at his
infidelity. But in spite of these annoying rumors, Mr. Davenport, by
virtue of his skill as a fraud and fakir, continued to exercise a great
deal of influence upon certain plain and simple-minded folks, whom it
was impossible to convince that they had not touched the materialized
spirits of their brothers, mothers, or sisters through the agency of his
wonderful power. His professional success received material accession
from his swarthy, Mephisto-like countenance, his deep, fiery eyes, his
large curved nose, the cynical expression of his mouth, and the lofty,
almost prophetic tone of his words.

When the waiter had made his last visit--he did not go far--the
following conversation took place in the room:

“There is to be a seance this evening at the residence of Mrs. Harding,”
began the medium. “Quite a number of influential people will be there,
and two or three millionaires. Conceal under your skirt the blonde
woman’s wig and the white material in which the spirits usually make
their appearance.”

“Very well,” replied Ida Soutchotte, in a resigned tone.

The waiter heard her pace the room. After a pause, she asked:

“Whose spirit are you going to control this evening, Benjamin?”

The waiter heard a loud, brutal laugh and the chair groaning beneath the
weight of the demonstrative professor.

“Guess.”

“How should I know?” she asked.

“I am going to conjure up the spirit of my dead wife.”

And another burst of laughter issued from the room, full of sinister
levity. A cry of terror burst from Ida’s lips. A muffled sound indicated
to the eavesdropper at the door that she was dragging herself to the
feet of the professor.

“Benjamin, Benjamin! don’t do it,” she sobbed.

“Why not? They say I broke Mrs. Davenport’s heart. The story is damaging
my reputation, but it will be forgotten if her spirit should address me
in terms of endearment from the other shore in the presence of numerous
witnesses. For you will speak to me tenderly, will you not, Ida?”

“No, no. You shall not do it; you shall not think of it. Listen to me,
for God’s sake. During the four years that I have been with you I have
obeyed you faithfully and suffered patiently. I have lied and deceived,
like you; I learned to imitate the sleep and symptoms of clairvoyants.
Tell me, did I ever refuse to serve you, or utter a word of complaint,
even when my shoulders bent with the weight of my burden, when you
pierced the flesh of my arms with knitting needles? Worse than all this,
I imitated distant voices behind curtains, and made mothers and wives
believe that their sons and husbands had come from a better world to
communicate with them. How often have I performed the most dangerous
feats in parlors with the lamps turned low? Clothed in a shroud or white
muslin I essayed to represent supernatural forms, whom tear-dimmed eyes
recognized as those of departed dear ones. You do not know what I
suffered at this unhallowed work. You scoff at the mysteries of
eternity. I suffer the torments of an impending retribution. My God! if
some time the dead whom I counterfeit should rise up before me with
uplifted arms and dreadful imprecations! This constant terror has
injured my heart--it will kill me. I am consumed by fever. Look how
emaciated, how worn-out and downcast I am. But I am under your control.
Do as you like with me; I am in your power, and I want it to be so. Have
I ever complained? But do not force me to do this thing, Benjamin. Have
pity on me for what I have done for you in the past, for what I am
suffering. Do not attempt this mummery; do not compel me to play the
role of your dead wife, who was so tender and beautiful. Oh, what put
that thought into your mind? Spare me, Benjamin, I implore you!”

The professor did not laugh again. Amid the confusion of upturned
articles of furniture the eavesdropper distinguished the sound of a
skull striking the floor. He concluded that Professor Davenport had
knocked Miss Ida down with a blow of his fist, or had kicked her as she
approached him. But the waiter did not enter the room, as no one rang
for him.


II.

That evening forty persons were assembled in Mrs. Joanne Harding’s
parlor, staring at the curtain where a spirit form was in process of
materializing. One dark lantern in a corner of the room contributed the
light that emphasized the darkness rather than relieved it. The room was
pervaded by profound silence, save the quickened, suppressed breathing
of the spectators. The fire in the grate cast mysterious rays of light,
resembling fugitive spirits, upon the objects around, almost
indistinguishable in the semi-gloom.

Professor Davenport was at his best this evening. The spirit world
obeyed him without hesitation, like their lawful master. He was the
mighty prince of souls. Hands that had no arms were seen picking flowers
from the vases; the touch of an invisible spirit conjured sweet
melodies from the keys of the piano; the furniture responded by
intelligent rappings to the most unanticipated questions. The professor
himself elevated his form in symbolical distortions from the floor to an
altitude of three feet, indicated by Mrs. Harding, and remained
suspended in the air for a quarter of an hour, holding live coals in his
hands.


III.

But the most interesting, as well as the most conclusive, test was to be
the materialization of the spirit of Mrs. Arabella Davenport, which the
professor had promised at the beginning of the seance.

“The hour has come,” exclaimed the medium.

And while the hearts of all throbbed with anxious suspense, and their
eyes distended with painful expectancy of the promised materialization,
Benjamin Davenport stood before the curtain. In the twilight the tall
man with the disheveled hair and demon look, was really terrible and
handsome.

“Appear, Arabella!” he exclaimed, in a commanding voice, with gestures
of the Nazarene at the sepulcher of Lazarus.

All are waiting----

Suddenly a cry burst from behind the curtain--a piercing, shuddering,
horrible shriek, the shriek of an expiring soul.

The spectators trembled. Mrs. Harding almost fainted. The medium
himself appeared surprised.

But Benjamin recovered his composure on seeing the curtain move and
admit the spirit.

The apparition was that of a young woman with long blonde tresses; she
was beautiful and pale, clad in some light, whitish material. Her breast
was bare, and on the left side appeared a bleeding wound, in which
trembled a knife.

The spectators arose and retreated, pushing their chairs to the wall.
Those who chanced to look at the medium noticed that a deathly pallor
had overspread his face, and that he was cowering and trembling.

But the young woman, Mrs. Arabella, the real one, whom he so well
remembered, she had come in response to his summons, and advanced in a
direct line toward Benjamin, who in terror covered his eyes to shut out
the ghastly sight, and with a cry fled behind the furniture. But she
dipped the finger of her thin hand into the blood from her wound and
traced it across the brow of the unconscious medium, the while
repeating, in a slow, monotonous tone that sounded like the echo of a
wail, again and again:

“You are my murderer! You are my murderer!”

And while he was rolling and tossing in deadly terror on the floor they
turned up the lights.

The spirit had vanished. But in the communicating room, behind the
curtain, they found the body of poor Miss Ida Soutchotte with horribly
distorted features. A physician who was present pronounced it heart
stroke.

And that is the reason that Prof. Benjamin Davenport appeared alone in a
New York courtroom to answer to the charge of having murdered his wife
four years ago in San Francisco.




THE PHANTOM WOMAN.


He took an all-possessing, burning fancy to her from the first. She was
neither young nor pretty, so far as he could see--but she was wrapped
round with mystery. That was the key of it all; she was noticeable in
spite of herself. Her face at the window, sunset after sunset; her eyes,
gazing out mournfully through the dusty panes, hypnotized the lawyer. He
saw her through the twilight night after night, and he grew at length to
wait through the days in a feverish waiting for dusk, and that one look
at an unknown woman.

She was always at the same window on the ground floor, sitting doing
nothing. She looked beyond, so the infatuated solicitor fancied, at him.
Once he even thought that he detected the ghost of a friendly smile on
her lips. Their eyes always met with a mute desire to make acquaintance.
This romance went on for a couple of months.

Gilbert Dent assured himself that nothing in this life can possibly
remain stationary, and he cudgeled his brain for a respectable manner of
introducing himself to his idol.

He had hardly arrived at this point when he received a shock. There came
an evening when she was not at the window.

Next morning he walked down Wood Lane on his way to the office. He
always went by train, but he felt a strong disinclination to go through
another day without a sight of her. His heart began to beat like a
schoolgirl’s as he drew near the house. If she should be at the window.
He was almost disposed to take his courage in his hand and call on her,
and--yes, even--tell her in a quick burst that she had mysteriously
become all the world to him. He could see nothing ridiculous in this
course; the possibility of her being married, or having family ties of
any sort, had simply never occurred to him.

However, she was not at the window; what was more, there was a sinister
silence, a sort of breathlessness about the whole place.

It was a very hot morning in late August. He looked a long time, but no
face came, and no movement stirred the house.

He went his way, walking like a man who has been heavily knocked on the
brow and sees stars still. That afternoon he left the office early, and
in less than an hour stood at the gate again. The window was blank. He
pushed the gate back--it hung on one hinge--and walked up the drive to
the door. There were five steps--five steps leading up to it. At the
foot he wheeled aside sharply to the window; he had a sick dread of
looking through the small panes--why he could not have told.

When at last he found courage to look he saw that there was a small
round table set just under the window--a work-table to all appearance;
one of those things with lots of little compartments all round and a lid
in the middle which shut over a well-like cavity for holding pieces of
needlework. He remembered that his mother had one--thirty years before.

Round the edge of the table was gripped a small, delicate hand. Gilbert
Dent’s eyes ran from this bloodless hand and slim wrist to a shoulder
under a coarse stuff bodice--to a rather wasted throat, which was bare
and flung back.

So this was the end--before the beginning. He saw her. She was dead;
twisted on the floor with a ghastly face turned up toward the ceiling,
and stiff fingers caught in desperation round the work table.

He stumbled away along the path and into the lane.

For a long time he could not realize the horror of this thing. The
influence of the decayed house hung over him--nothing seemed real. It
was quite dark when he moved away from the gate, and went in the
direction of the nearest police station. That she was dead--this woman
whose very name he did not know although she influenced him so
powerfully--he was certain; one look at the face would have told anyone
that. That she was murdered he more than suspected. He had seen no blood
about; there had been no mark on the long, bare throat, and yet the word
rushed in his ears, “Murder.”

Later on he went back with a police officer.

They broke into the house and entered the room. It was in utter
darkness, of course, by now. Dent, his fingers trembling, struck a
match. It flared round the walls and lighted them for a moment before he
let it fall on the dusty floor.

The policeman began to light his lantern and turned it stolidly on the
window. He had no reason for delay; he was eager to get to the bottom of
the business. His professional zeal was whetted; this promised to be a
mystery with a spice in it.

He turned the light full on the window; he gave a strange, choked cry,
half of rage, half of apprehension. Then he went up to Gilbert Dent, who
stood in the middle of the room with his hands before his eyes, and took
his shoulder and shook it none too gently.

“There ain’t nobody,” he said.

Dent looked wildly at the window--the recess was empty except for the
work-table. The woman was gone.

They searched the house; they minutely inspected the garden. Everything
was normal; everything told the same mournful tale--of desertion, of
death, of long empty years. But they found no woman, nor trace of one.

“This house,” said the policeman, looking suspiciously into the lawyer’s
face, “has been empty for longer than I can remember. Nobody’ll live in
it. They do say something about foul play a good many years ago. I don’t
know about that. All I do know is that the landlord can’t get it off his
hands.”

It was doubtful if Gilbert Dent heard one word of what the man was
saying. He was too stunned to do anything but creep home--when he was
allowed to go--and let himself stealthily into his own house with a
latch key; he was afraid even of himself. He did not go to bed that
night.

As for the mystery of the woman, the matter was allowed to drop; it
ended--officially. There was a shrug and a grin at the police station.
The impression there was that the lawyer had been drinking--that the
dead woman in the empty room was a gruesome freak of his tipsy brain.

       *       *       *       *       *

A week or so later Dent called on his brother Ned--the one near relation
he had. Ned was a doctor; perhaps he was a shade more matter-of-fact
than Gilbert; at all events, when the latter told his story of the house
and the woman, he attributed the affair solely to liver.

“You are overworked”--the elder brother looked at the younger’s yellow
face. “An experience of this nature is by no means uncommon. Haven’t you
heard of people having their pet ‘spooks’?”

“But this was a real woman,” he declared. “I--I, well, I was in love
with her. I had made up my mind to marry her--if I could.”

Ned gave him a keen, swift glance.

“We’ll go to Brighton to-morrow,” he said, with quiet decision. “As for
your work, everything must be put aside. You’ve run completely down. You
ought to have been taken in hand before.”

They went to Brighton, and it really seemed as if Ned was right, and
that the woman at the window had been merely a nervous creation. It
seemed so, that is, for nearly three weeks, and then the climax came.

It was in the twilight--she had always been part of it--that Gilbert
Dent saw her again; the woman that he had found lying dead.

They were walking, the two brothers, along the cliffs.

The wind was blowing in their faces, the sea was booming beneath the
cliff. Ned had just said it was about time they turned back to the hotel
and had some dinner, when Gilbert with a cry leapt forward to the very
edge of the flat grass path on which they were strolling. The movement
was so sudden that his brother barely caught him in time. They
struggled and swayed on the very edge of the cliff for a second;
Gilbert, possessed by some sudden frenzy, seemed resolved to go over,
but the other at last dragged him backward, and they rolled together on
the close, thick turf.

At this point Gilbert opened his eyes and tried to get on his feet.

“Better?” asked his brother, cheerfully, holding out a helping hand.
“Strange! The sea has that effect on some people. Didn’t think that you
were one of them.”

“What effect?”

“Vertigo, my dear fellow.”

“Ned,” said the other solemnly, “I saw her. It is not worth your while
to try to account for anything. I have been inclined to think that you
were right--that she, the woman at the window, was a fancy, that I had
fallen in love with a creation of my own brain; but I saw her again
to-night. You must have seen her yourself--she was within a couple of
feet of you. Why did you not try and save her? It was nothing short of
murder to let her go over like that. I did my best.”

“You certainly did--to kill us both,” said Ned, grimly.

Gilbert gave him a wild look.

After luncheon Ned persuaded him to rest--watched him fall asleep, and
then went out.

In the porch of the hotel he was met by a waiter on his return who told
him that Gilbert had left about a quarter of an hour after he had
himself gone out.

Directly he heard this he feared the worst; having, as is usual in such
cases, a very hazy idea of what the worst might be. Of course he must
follow without a moment’s delay; but a reference to the time-table told
him that there was not another train for an hour, and that was slow.

It was already getting dusk when he arrived there. He felt certain that
Gilbert would go there. He got to the end of the lane and walked up it
slowly, examining every house. There would be no difficulty in
recognizing the one he wanted; Gilbert had described it in detail more
than once.

He stood outside the loosely hanging gate at last, and stared through
the darkness at the shabby stucco front and rank garden.

He went down a flight of steps to the back door, and finding it
unfastened, stepped into a stone passage. It was one of the problems of
the place that he should have avoided the main entrance door with a
half-admitted dread, and that, only half admitting still, he was afraid
to mount the long flight of stone stairs leading from the servants’
quarters. However, he pulled himself together and went up to the room.

It was quite dark inside. He heard something scuttle across the floor;
he felt the grit and dust of years under his feet. He struck a
match--just as Gilbert had done--and looked first at the recess in which
the window was built. The match flared round the room for a moment and
gave him a flash picture of his surroundings. He saw the stripes of
gaudy paper moving almost imperceptibly, like tentacles of some sea
monster, from the wall; he saw a creature--it looked like a rat--scurry
across the floor from the window to the great mantelpiece of hard white
marble.

If he had seen nothing more than this.

He saw in detail all that the first match had flashed at him. He saw his
brother lying on the floor; a ghastly coincidence, his hand was caught
round the edge of the work-table as hers had been. The other hand was
clenched across his breast; there was a look of great agony on his face.

A dead face, of course. This was the end of the affair. He was lying
dead by the window where the woman had sat every night at dusk and
smiled at him.

The second match went out; the brother of the dead man struck a third.
He looked again and closely. Then he staggered to his feet and gave a
cry. It rang through the empty rooms and echoed without wearying down
the long, stone passages in the basement.

Gilbert’s head was thrown back; his chin peaked to the ceiling. On his
throat were livid marks. The doctor saw them distinctly; he saw the grip
of small fingers; the distinct impression of a woman’s little hand.

       *       *       *       *       *

The curious thing about the whole story--the most curious thing,
perhaps--is that no other eye ever saw those murderous marks. So there
was no scandal, no chase after the murderer, no undiscovered crime. They
faded; when the doctor saw his brother again in the full light and in
the presence of others his throat was clear. And the post mortem proved
that death was due to natural causes.

So the matter stands, and will.

But where the house and its overgrown garden stood runs a new road with
neat red and white villas.

Whatever secret it knew--if any--it kept discreetly.

Ned Dent is morbid enough to go down the smart new road in the twilight
sometimes and wonder.




THE PHANTOM HAG.


The other evening in an old castle the conversation turned upon
apparitions, each one of the party telling a story. As the accounts grew
more horrible the young ladies drew closer together.

“Have you ever had an adventure with a ghost?” said they to me. “Do you
not know a story to make us shiver? Come, tell us something.”

“I am quite willing to do so,” I replied. “I will tell you of an
incident that happened to myself.”

Toward the close of the autumn of 1858 I visited one of my friends,
sub-prefect of a little city in the center of France. Albert was an old
companion of my youth, and I had been present at his wedding. His
charming wife was full of goodness and grace. My friend wished to show
me his happy home, and to introduce me to his two pretty little
daughters. I was feted and taken great care of. Three days after my
arrival I knew the entire city, curiosities, old castles, ruins, etc.
Every day about four o’clock Albert would order the phaeton, and we
would take a long ride, returning home in the evening. One evening my
friend said to me:

“To-morrow we will go further than usual. I want to take you to the
Black Rocks. They are curious old Druidical stones, on a wild and
desolate plain. They will interest you. My wife has not seen them yet,
so we will take her.”

The following day we drove out at the usual hour. Albert’s wife sat by
his side. I occupied the back seat alone. The weather was gray and
somber that afternoon, and the journey was not very pleasant. When we
arrived at the Black Rocks the sun was setting. We got out of the
phaeton, and Albert took care of the horses.

We walked some little distance through the fields before reaching the
giant remains of the old Druid religion. Albert’s wife wished to climb
to the summit of the altar, and I assisted her. I can still see her
graceful figure as she stood draped in a red shawl, her veil floating
around her.

“How beautiful it is! But does it not make you feel a little
melancholy?” said she, extending her hand toward the dark horizon, which
was lighted a little by the last rays of the sun.

The afternoon wind blew violently, and sighed through the stunted trees
that grew around the stone cromlechs; not a dwelling nor a human being
was in sight. We hastened to get down, and silently retraced our steps
to the carriage.

“We must hurry,” said Albert; “the sky is threatening, and we shall have
scarcely time to reach home before night.”

We carefully wrapped the robes around his wife. She tied the veil around
her face, and the horses started into a rapid trot. It was growing dark;
the scenery around us was bare and desolate; clumps of fir trees here
and there and furze bushes formed the only vegetation. We began to feel
the cold, for the wind blew with fury; the only sound we heard was the
steady trot of the horses and the sharp clear tinkle of their bells.

Suddenly I felt the heavy grasp of a hand upon my shoulder. I turned my
head quickly. A horrible apparition presented itself before my eyes. In
the empty place at my side sat a hideous woman. I tried to cry out; the
phantom placed her fingers upon her lips to impose silence upon me. I
could not utter a sound. The woman was clothed in white linen; her head
was cowled; her face was overspread with a corpse-like pallor, and in
place of eyes were ghastly black cavities.

I sat motionless, overcome by terror.

The ghost suddenly stood up and leaned over the young wife. She
encircled her with her arms, and lowered her hideous head as if to kiss
her forehead.

“What a wind!” cried Madame Albert, turning precipitately toward me. “My
veil is torn.”

As she turned I felt the same infernal pressure on my shoulder, and the
place occupied by the phantom was empty. I looked out to the right and
left--the road was deserted, not an object in sight.

“What a dreadful gale!” said Madame Albert. “Did you feel it? I cannot
explain the terror that seized me; my veil was torn by the wind as if by
an invisible hand; I am trembling still.”

“Never mind,” said Albert, smiling; “wrap yourself up, my dear; we will
soon be warming ourselves by a good fire at home. I am starving.”

A cold perspiration covered my forehead; a shiver ran through me; my
tongue clove to the roof of my mouth, and I could not articulate a
sound; a sharp pain in my shoulder was the only sensible evidence that I
was not the victim of an hallucination. Putting my hand upon my aching
shoulder, I felt a rent in the cloak that was wrapped around me. I
looked at it; five perfectly distinct holes--visible traces of the grip
of the horrible phantom. I thought for a moment that I should die or
that my reason should leave me; it was, I think, the most dreadful
moment of my life.

Finally I became more calm; this nameless agony had lasted for some
minutes; I do not think it is possible for a human being to suffer more
than I did during that time. As soon as I had recovered my senses, I
thought at first I would tell my friends all that had passed, but
hesitated, and finally did not, fearing that my story would frighten
Madame Albert, and feeling sure my friend would not believe me. The
lights of the little city revived me, and gradually the oppression of
terror that overwhelmed me became lighter.

So soon as we reached home, Madame Albert untied her veil; it was
literally in shreds. I hoped to find my clothes whole and prove to
myself that it was all imagination. But no, the cloth was torn in five
places, just where the fingers had seized my shoulder. There was no
mark, however, upon my flesh, only a dull pain.

I returned to Paris the next day, where I endeavored to forget the
strange adventure; or at least when I thought of it, I would force
myself to think it an hallucination.

The day after my return I received a letter from my friend Albert. It
was edged with black. I opened it with a vague fear.

His wife had died the day of my return.




FROM THE TOMB.

TRANSLATED FROM THE FRENCH OF DE MAUPASSANT BY E. C. WAGGENER.


The guests filed slowly into the hotel’s great dining-hall and took
their places, the waiters began to serve them leisurely, to give the
tardy ones time to arrive and to save themselves the bother of bringing
back the courses; and the old bathers, the yearly habitues, with whom
the season was far advanced, kept a close watch on the door each time it
opened, hoping for the coming of new faces.

New faces! the single distraction of all pleasure resorts. We go to
dinner chiefly to canvass the daily arrivals, to wonder who they are,
what they do and what they think. A restless desire seems to have taken
possession of us, a longing for pleasant adventures, for friendly
acquaintances, perhaps, for possible lovers. In this elbow-to-elbow life
our unknown neighbors become of paramount importance. Curiosity is
piqued, sympathy on the alert and the social instinct doubly active.

We have hatreds for a week, friendships for a month, and view all men
with the special eyes of watering-place intimacy. Sometimes during an
hour’s chat after dinner, under the trees of the park, where ripples a
healing spring, we discover men of superior intellect and surprising
merit, and a month later have wholly forgotten these new friends, so
charming at first sight.

There, too, more specially than elsewhere, serious and lasting ties are
formed. We see each other every day, we learn to know each other very
soon, and in the affection that springs up so rapidly between us there
is mingled much of the sweet abandon of old and tried intimates. And
later on, how tender are the memories cherished of the first hours of
this friendship, of the first communion in which the soul came to light,
of the first glances that questioned and responded to the secret
thoughts and interrogatories the lips have not dared yet to utter, of
the first cordial confidence and delicious sensation of opening one’s
heart to someone who has seemed to lay bare to you his own! The very
dullness of the hours, as it were, the monotony of days all alike, but
renders more complete the rapid budding and blooming of friendship’s
flower.

That evening, then, as on every evening, we awaited the appearance of
unfamiliar faces.

There came only two, but very peculiar ones, those of a man and a
woman--father and daughter. They seemed to have stepped from the pages
of some weird legend; and yet there was an attraction about them, albeit
an unpleasant one, that made me set them down at once as the victims of
some fatality.

The father was tall, spare, a little bent, with hair blanched white; too
white for his still young countenance, and in his manner and about his
person the sedate austerity of carriage that bespeaks the Puritan. The
daughter was, possibly, some twenty-four or twenty-five years of age.
She was very slight, emaciated, her exceedingly pale countenance bearing
a languid, spiritless expression; one of those people whom we sometimes
encounter, apparently too weak for the cares and tasks of life, too
feeble to move or do the things that we must do every day. Nevertheless
the girl was pretty, with the ethereal beauty of an apparition. It was
she, undoubtedly, who came for the benefit of the waters.

They chanced to be placed at table immediately opposite to me; and I was
not long in noticing that the father, too, had a strange affection,
something wrong about the nerves it seemed. Whenever he was going to
reach for anything, his hand, with a jerky twitch, described a sort of
fluttering zig-zag, before he was able to grasp what he was after. Soon,
the motion disturbed me so much, I kept my head turned in order not to
see it. But not before I had also observed that the young girl kept her
glove on her left hand while she ate.

Dinner ended, I went out as usual for a turn in the grounds belonging to
the establishment. A sort of park, I might say, stretching clear to the
little station of Auvergne, Chatel-Guyon, nestling in a gorge at the
foot of the high mountain, from which flowed the sparkling, bubbling
springs, hot from the furnace of an ancient volcano. Beyond us there,
the domes, small extinct craters--of which Chatel-Guyon is the starting
point--raised their serrated heads above the long chain; while beyond
the domes came two distinct regions, one of them, needle-like peaks, the
other of bold, precipitous mountains.

It was very warm that evening, and I contented myself with pacing to and
fro under the rustling trees, gazing at the mountains and listening to
the strains of the band, pouring from the Casino, situated on a knoll
that overlooked the grounds.

Presently, I perceived the father and daughter coming toward me with
slow steps. I bowed to them in that pleasant Continental fashion with
which one always salutes his hotel companions. The gentleman halted at
once.

“Pardon me, sir,” said he, “but may I ask if you can direct us to a
short walk, easy and pretty, if possible?”

“Certainly,” I answered, and offered to lead them myself to the valley
through which the swift river flows--a deep, narrow cleft between two
great declivities, rocky and wooded.

They accepted, and as we walked, we naturally discussed the virtue of
the mineral waters. They had, as I had surmised, come there on his
daughter’s account.

“She has a strange malady,” said he, “the seat of which her physicians
cannot determine. She suffers from the most inexplicable nervous
symptoms. Sometimes they declare her ill of a heart disease; sometimes
of a liver complaint; again of a spinal trouble. At present they
attribute it to the stomach--that great motor and regulator of the
body--this Protean disease of a thousand forms, a thousand modes of
attack. It is why we are here. I, myself, think it is her nerves. In any
case it is sad.”

This reminded me of his own jerking hand.

“It may be hereditary,” said I, “your own nerves are a little disturbed,
are they not?”

“Mine?” he answered, tranquilly. “Not at all, I have always possessed
the calmest nerves.” Then, suddenly, as if bethinking himself:

“For this,” touching his hand, “is not nerves, but the result of a
shock, a terrible shock that I suffered once. Fancy it, sir, this child
of mine has been buried alive!”

I could find nothing to say, I was dumb with surprise.

“Yes,” he continued, “buried alive; but hear the story, it is not long.
For some time past Juliette had seemed affected with a disordered action
of the heart. We were finally certain that the trouble was organic and
feared the worst. One day it came, she was brought in lifeless--dead.
She had fallen dead while walking in the garden. Physicians came in
haste, but nothing could be done. She was gone. For two days and nights
I watched beside her myself, and with my own hands placed her in her
coffin, which I followed to the cemetery and saw placed in the family
vault. This was in the country, in the province of Lorraine.

“It had been my wish, too, that she should be buried in her jewels,
bracelets, necklace and rings, all presents that I had given her, and in
her first ball dress. You can imagine, sir, the state of my heart in
returning home. She was all that I had left, my wife had been dead for
many years. I returned, in truth, half mad, shut myself alone in my room
and fell into my chair dazed, unable to move, merely a miserable,
breathing wreck.

“Soon my old valet, Prosper, who had helped me place Juliette in her
coffin and lay her away for her last sleep, came in noiselessly to see
if he could not induce me to eat. I shook my head, answering nothing. He
persisted:

“‘Monsieur is wrong; this will make him ill. Will monsieur allow me,
then, to put him to bed?’

“‘No, no,’ I answered. ‘Let me alone.’

“He yielded and withdrew.

“How many hours passed I do not know. What a night! What a night! It was
very cold; my fire of logs had long since burned out in the great
fireplace; and the wind, a wintry blast, charged with an icy frost,
howled and screamed about the house and strained at my windows with a
curiously sinister sound.

“Long hours, I say, rolled by. I sat still where I had fallen,
prostrated, overwhelmed; my eyes wide open, but my body strengthless,
dead; my soul drowned in despair. Suddenly the great bell gave a loud
peal.

“I gave such a leap that my chair cracked under me. The slow, solemn
sound rang through the empty house. I looked at the clock.

“It was two in the morning. Who could be coming at such an hour?

“Twice again the bell pulled sharply. The servants would never answer,
perhaps never hear it. I took up a candle and made my way to the door. I
was about to demand:

“‘Who is there?’ but, ashamed of the weakness, nerved myself and drew
back the bolts. My heart throbbed, my pulse beat, I threw back the panel
brusquely and there, in the darkness, saw a shape like a phantom,
dressed in white.

“I recoiled, speechless with anguish, stammering:

“‘Who--who are you?’

“A voice answered:

“‘It is I, father.’

“It was my child, Juliette.

“Truly, I thought myself mad. I shuddered, shrinking backward before the
specter as it advanced, gesticulating with my hand to ward off the
apparition. It is that gesture which has never left me.

“Again the phantom spoke:

“‘Father, father! See, I am not dead. Someone came to rob me of my
jewels--they cut off my finger--the--the flowing blood revived me.’

“And I saw then that she was covered with blood. I fell to my knees
panting, sobbing, laughing, all in one. As soon as I regained my senses,
but still so bewildered I scarcely comprehended the happiness that had
come to me, I took her in my arms, carried her to her room, and rang
frantically for Prosper to rekindle the fire, bring a warm drink for
her, and go for the doctor.

“He came running, entered, gazed a moment at my daughter in the
chair--gave a gasp of fright and horror and fell back--dead.

“It was he who had opened the vault, who had wounded and robbed my
child, and then abandoned her; for he could not efface all trace of his
deed; and he had not even taken the trouble to return the coffin to its
niche; sure, besides, of not being suspected by me, who trusted him so
fully. We are truly very unfortunate people, monsieur.”

He was silent.

Meanwhile the night had come on, enveloping in the gloom the still and
solitary little valley; a sort of mysterious dread seemed to fall upon
me in presence of these strange beings--this corpse come to life, and
this father with his painful gestures.

“Let us return,” said I, “the night has grown chill.”

And still in silence, we retraced our steps back to the hotel, and I
shortly afterward returned to the city. I lost all further knowledge of
the two peculiar visitors to my favorite summer resort.




SANDY’S GHOST.


“‘Commerdations fer the night, stranger? Waal, yes; I reckon we can fix
a place fer you. Hev a cheer an’ set you down.”

“Thank you. Don’t you find this rather a lonely place--no neighbors, no
nothing, that I can see? How came you to settle here, so far removed
from other habitations?”

“Waal, perhaps it’s best not ter ask too many questions ter once.”

“Beg your pardon. No offense was intended, I assure you. Simply idle
curiosity.”

“Don’t say ’nuther word, stranger, but come in an’ we’ll hev a snack fer
supper. Polly, bring on the victu’ls. Yer jes’ in time.”

Polly at once obeyed. She was a typical Western girl--tall, lithe,
graceful and limpid-eyed. She was clear-skinned and high-spirited, too,
and in this case ignorant through no fault of her own. John Barr’s eyes
scanned her intently, and a flush came to her cheeks. For the first time
in her life she was unpleasantly conscious of her bare feet. It may have
been this that made her stumble and spill some of the contents of an
earthen bowl over the guest’s knees as she placed it on the table.

Her eyes flashed and a tear of anger twinkled on the lashes. She
stopped, half meaning to apologize, but an oath from her father caused
her to set the bowl down heavily and to hurry from the cabin. A moment
later Barr saw a flutter of pink calico from behind a pile of rocks. Old
Kit Robinson saw it, too.

“Don’t wonder at yer sayin’ ’tain’t right. She’s a sma’t gal, and a good
looker, too, as should hev been sent away frum here ter school ter be
eddicated. But she won’t leave her no ’count dad. I orter be shot fer
cussin’ her. But I ain’t what I use ter be. Settin’ here an’ keepin’
guard makes me narvous.”

Barr’s eyes asked the question his lips refused to speak. Supper eaten,
the men went outside and sat with their chairs tilted back against the
cabin. Something in the younger man’s frank face had softened old Kit
into a reminiscent mood and made him strangely inclined to gratify an
idle curiosity.

The soft evening winds sighed through the branches of the tall spruce
pines, and the declining rays of the setting sun caused the shadow of
the rude home to stretch out longer across the greensward. From its
shelter where he sat John Barr looked out on the grand ranges of the
Rockies and wondered where in their vastness he would find the man he
sought--the finding of whom had brought him out into this wild and
almost forsaken mining camp.

“Stranger, I’ve took a likin’ ter you. Ye’ve a sumthin’ about you thet
reminds me of sum one I know, an’ you look like an honest chap. Say, do
you b’lieve in ghosts?”

He put the question very suddenly, and a look of disappointment crossed
his face when Barr told him that he did not believe in spooks.

“Waal, I’ve seen ’em!”

A thought connecting the pink calico with something in the past came to
Barr’s mind.

“Can’t you tell me about it?” he asked.

“I’d like ter if you’ll sw’ar, on yer derringer, never ter blab. Will
you sw’ar?”

The solitary guest started to smile, but the smile faded at the thought
of unshed tears in Polly’s eyes. It might make it easier for her if he
humored the old man.

“I’ll swear,” he said. And he did.

“Do you see yan old spruce at the turn of the trail an’ the cliff jes’
above? Waal, thet’s the spot I’m watchin’ an’ guardin’ till the owner
cums ter claim it. I’m quick ter burn powder an’ a pretty sure shot. I
know a man when I sees him, an’ I ain’t easy fooled. Waal, ter begin
with, I had a pardner once, an’ he wuz a man, sure ’nough. He wuz frum
the State of New York. I never axed him as ter how so fine a gent cum
ter be diggin’ an’ shov’lin’ in the Rockies, though ter myself I said
thar wuz sum good reason. He had light hair, an’ we called him Sandy,
fer short, an’ he wuz jes’ erbout as gritty as sand. We wuz as unlike as
any two fellers you ever saw. He wuz quietlike an’ steady, an’ I wuz
sorter wild an’ reckless an’ liked mounting dew mos’ too well. Waal,
when we had a little dust scraped together, we would divvy, an’ I tuk my
share way down ter the station on the other side of the cliffs an’ sent
it off ter the bank in Helena. But I allers left sum hid whar the gal
would find it. Old Sandy hed a bank of his own thet no one knew erbout,
’cepting hisself, an’ ev’ry time we divided he’d carry part of it ter
his hidin’ place, an’ then give the rest ter me ter send ter his boy,
thet he said wuz bein’ eddicated in sum college way up in Boston. He
seemed ter think a heap of thet boy. Arter awhile my old woman give out,
an’ soon we laid her away on the hillside. It wuz hard, stranger.”

Old Kit’s voice failed him for a moment, but he quickly regained his
composure and continued:

“But when old Sandy, my good old pard, give up I didn’t keer fer
nothin’. We buried him in style. All the boys frum round the diggin’s
wuz thar, an’ many an eye wuz wet. We didn’t hev nary a preacher, but
the gal she prayed at the grave. Fer the life of me I don’t know where
she larnt it. Reckon the old woman must hev told her. Next mornin’ the
gal showed me a letter thet Sandy give her jes’ afore he died. It wuz
ter his boy, an’ she wuz ter give it ter him if he ever cum out this
way, an’ she’s got it yet.

“Thet same evenin’ after supper, feelin’ kinder glumish an’ like thar
wuz sumthin’ in my throat I couldn’t swaller, I tuk a stroll up the
gulch. I went on out ter the top of the edge of the big rock an’ got ter
studyin’ whar I’d find another pard like Sandy. All ter once I felt a
hand touch my shoulder kinder light once or twice. I jumped up, half
expectin’ it wuz Sandy, but it wuz only the gal. Waal, I wuz all tuk
back at fust, an’ then I got mad.

“‘What air you doin’ up here?’ I axed, kinder rough. She hed tears in
her eyes as she looked at me, an’ said:

“‘Pap, don’t git mad. I wuz lonesum. I seed you cumin’ up this way, an’
I follered you, ’cause I wanted ter tell you thet Sandy said ter give
his boy his pile when he cums.’

“‘Waal,’ says I, ‘you might hev waited till I cum back ter the house.’
An’ then I sent her back.

“Arter she wuz gone I sot ter studyin’ whar in the world Sandy’s pile
wuz. I tried ter think whar could he hev hid it. But it warn’t no use.
All ter once I noticed it wuz plum dark, an’ as these mountings ain’t a
he’lthy place fer a man ter roam in arter nightfall, especially if he
ain’t got his shootin’ irons on, I cut a pretty swift gait fer the
shack.

“Jes’ as I cum round the bend thar at the pine I happened ter look up
terward the clift, an’ thar sot Sandy. Yes, sir. It wuz him sure as yer
born. My feet felt heavy as lead, an’ I couldn’t move frum the spot. I
tried ter holler, but it warn’t no go. Finally I gave a sudden jerk an’
made a step terward him, an’ as I did so he disappeared. Then I made
tracks fer home. But I kept mum, ’cause I knowed the boys would say thet
mounting dew wuz lickin’ up my brains, an’ I would be seein’ snakes an’
sich things afore long.

“The next night sumhow er ’nuther I thought ter go an’ see if he wuz
thar ag’in, an’ sure ’nough, thar he sot, lookin’ kinder sad an’ making
marks on the rocks with his fingers. I hed my hand on my gun this time,
so I got a little closter than afore. But, by hookey, he got away from
me ag’in, nor did he cum back.

“I could hardly wait fer the next night ter cum round. At the same time
I wuz on hand good an’ early, jes’ as it begun ter git dark, an’ the
trees looked like long spooks a-stretchin’ out their arms. I looked
terward the clift, an’ thar he sot a-markin’ an’ a-scratchin’ on the
rock with his fingers an’ still looking sad. Now, this bein’ the third
time, I kinder got bold, an’ I went a little closter, an’ says:

“‘Sandy, wha-what’s the ma-mat-matter with you? Didn’t the boys do the
plantin’ right fer you?’

“Then as luck would hev it I thought of sumthin’ else right quick, an’ I
said:

“‘Or is it the dust you hev hid whar yer sittin’?’

“Waal, he looked up then, an’ the happiest smile cum ter his face, an’
all ter once he disappeared ag’in. An’ since then I hev sot here an’
guarded the place till the right one cums along ter claim it.

“Let’s see. What did you say yer name wuz?”

“Pardon me. I thought I had told you. My name is John Willett Barr.”

“Polly, oh, Polly! Cum hyar, gal. What wuz Sandy’s full name? I plum
fergot.”

“What you want ter know fer?” she asked. “I ain’t a-goin’ ter tell you
now. Thet’s my own secret.”

“Cum, cum, gal. Tell me ter once, or it won’t be he’lthy fer you.”

“Waal, then,” she answered stubbornly, “it’s John Willett Barr.”

At her reply the younger man’s face grew deathly pale, and he started up
from his chair, but Kit thrust him back into his seat, saying:

“Bring me the letter, Polly.”

“What are you goin’ ter do with it, pa?” she inquired, cautiously.

“I promised old Sandy on my oath ter keep it till the right one cums
erlong ter claim it, an’ I mean ter keep my word. The right one is here,
gal. Thar he sits. So trot thet letter out, an’ don’t parley long with
me if you knows when yer well off.”

Polly stared at the younger man in utter bewilderment for a moment.
Then, turning slowly, she stepped quietly into the cabin after the
precious document; an unusual gleam of joy lighted up her face and a
suppressed excitement shone in her eyes. Under her breath she said:
“Sumhow er ruther I felt he wuz the right one.”

Too truly, John Barr realized in that painful moment that he whom he
sought was now dead to him; that the father from whom he had been parted
so many years was sleeping that long, dreamless sleep in the clay mound
on the hillside, which marked his last resting place. As he turned to
look at the face of old, honest Kit, who had been his father’s friend
during those long years of forced exile, a happy smile lit up the old
miner’s rugged features as he pointed with his finger to the rock cliff
near the old spruce vine, and said, in an exultant, trembling voice:

“Thar he be, stranger--jes’ as I hev seen him many a night--yer dad--my
pard--pore old Sandy!”

With an eager voice John Barr sprang forward, and the mountains echoed
and re-echoed the plaintive cry of “Father! Father!” But his
outstretched arms clasped only emptiness and the darkening shadows of
the rapidly approaching night.




THE GHOSTS OF RED CREEK.

BY S. T.


To the northward of Mississippi City and its neighbor, Handsboro, there
extends a tract of pine forest for miles with but few habitations
scattered through it. Black and Red Creeks, with their numerous
branches, drain this region into the Pascagoula River to the eastward.
With the swamps of Pascagoula as a refuge, and the luxuriant and
unfrequented bottoms of Red and Black Creeks to browse upon, there are
few choicer spots for deer. Knowing this fact, a small party of
gentlemen on the day before a crisp, cold Christmas, started from
Handsboro in a large four-wheeled wagon for a thirty-mile drive into
this wilderness of pine and a week’s sport after the deer. The guide was
Jim Caruthers, a true woodsman, and the driver and general factotum, a
jolly negro named Jack Lyons, than whom no one could make a better
hoe-cake and cook a venison steak. His laugh could be heard a quarter of
a mile, and his good nature was as expansive as the range of the
laughter.

The usual experiences of a hunting camp were heartily enjoyed during
the first days of this life out of doors; but its cream did not rise
until about the fifth night, when, from familiar intercourse, Jack Lyons
became loquacious, and after the day’s twenty or twenty-five-mile walk,
would spin yarns in front of the camp fire, which brought forgetfulness
of fatigue.

The night before New Year’s was intensely cold. The cold north wind of
the afternoon had subsided at sunset, and only a gust now and again
touched the musical leaves of the pines, making them vibrant with that
mournful score of nature’s operas which even maestros have failed to
catch.

In front of two new and white tents two sportsmen reclined at length
within reach of the warmth of the fire, while opposite them rested at
ease the guide and the worthy Jack Lyons.

Wearied with the day’s chase four stanch hounds--Ringwood, Rose, Jet and
Boxer--were dreaming of future quarry.

The firelight brought out in bright relief the trunks of the tall pines
like cathedral columns, and sparkling through the leafy dome overhead
the scintillating stars glistened with a diamond brightness. A silence
which added its influence to the scene rested about the borders of the
creek below, and gave more effect to the story of the veteran teamster
than perhaps it otherwise would have had.

“If de deer run down de creek,” said old Jack, smacking his lips over a
carefully prepared brewing of the real Campbellton punch, “wese boun’ to
see fun to-morrer, for dey’ll take us down thar by de old Gibbet’s
place. In daylight dere’s no place like it, but after nightfall, you bet
you wouldn’t catch dis nigger thar.”

Old Jack was naturally asked why he didn’t care about visiting the
Gibbet’s place at night. Asking to be excused until he filled his pipe,
the silence was unbroken until his return. He piled on more pine knots
and commenced:

“You kno’, gemmen, dat when de gunboats was in de sound we folks had to
travel way back hyar on dese roads outun de range of deir big guns. I
was ’gaged by Mr. Harrison in hauling salt from de factory at
Mississippi City, on de beach ober to Mobile, an’ I had been making a
trip ebery week or so. Dis back country road was neber thought ob by de
Federals, an’ we had good times long de way, no shells and no shootin’.

“De nite, gemmen, I’se speakin’ of was a Friday, dat yous all knows is
unlucky. Well, you see, I hitched up Betsie an’ Rose in de lead, an’ ole
Fox an’ Blossom at de pole, an’ takes in de biggest load of salt dat
team eber carried. I starts out an’ crosses de Biloxi Riber at Han’sboro
jes’ as de moon was goin’ down. Yes, boss, dese roads weren’t no better
den now, an’ de rain had made ’em mighty rough when yer come to de
holes.

“I sat in de seat whistlin’ ‘De Cows is in de Pea Patch,’ and a-thinkin’
of Sarah Jamison, what was afterwards my wife, when I felt de off fore
wheel go ‘kersush’ in a hole up to de hub. I’d made seventeen miles out
ob Han’sboro. I did some cussin’, an’ den went to de fence, about twenty
yards off, an’ took out a rail to prize up de wheel. Den I saw I was at
Mister Gibbet’s place. I sez to myself, I’ll go up to de house an’ get
old Mr. Gibbet to give me a turn. I had done gone by dar two weeks afore
an’ seed de old man.

“Now, gemmen, yer listen to me, for what I’se tellin’ yer is as sure as
Jinny’ll blow de horn on de las’ day. I walked up to de house an’ dar I
saw a bright light inside. It showed out froo de windows, an’ I saw
shadders of Miss Gibbet and Mrs. Gibbet on de window curtain--shore,
honeys, shore. De front do’ was shet, an’ I steps up on ter de gallery
an’ knocks wid de butt end of my whip. I didn’t knock loud, needer. God
bless us all, gemmen, de lights went out like dat, an’ I hears set up a
laugh, ha-ha-ha-ha. How dat set my knees a-shakin’. I opens de do’, an’
dere was no sign of anybody. I struck a match an’ all de furniture was
moved out, an’ de old red curtain dat I fought I seed was in rags. De
whole family was gone, for shore. I didn’t kno’ ’zactly what to think
’bout dem strange voices, but I started back to de wagon, when it
lightened, an’ bress God, dar in de front yard was six graves jes’ made.
Somefin’ wrong here, sed I; an’ I builds a fire by de wagon an’ digs de
wheel out. Jes’ den old Squire Pasture kem along de road from Mobile,
an’ he tells me de news. Ole man Gibbet cut de froats of his wife and
fore chillerns an’ shoot hisself in de head outun jealousy of his wife.
Dey was all buried in de front yard, an’ de house was deserted ten days
befo’.

“Gemmen, when I hear dat, dem mules make de quickest time to Mobile eber
seed; an’ youse can tell me dar’s no ghosts, but yo’ don’ catch me roun’
dat log house of Gibbet’s ’ceptin’ sun’s an hour high.”

Jack looked suspiciously over his shoulder into the darkness and crawled
into his blanket, muttering:

“It scares dis nigger eben now to tell ’bout dat night.”

Sleep soon fell upon the camp, but the impression of old Jack’s story
survived the night, and the next day he still asserted its truth.




THE SPECTRE BRIDE.


The winter nights up at Sault Ste. Marie are as white and luminous as
the Milky Way. The silence that rests upon the solitude appears to be
white also. Nature has included sound in her arrestment. Save the still
white frost, all things are obliterated. The stars are there, but they
seem to belong to heaven and not to earth. They are at an immeasurable
height, and so black is the night that the opaque ether rolls between
them and the observer in great liquid billows.

In such a place it is difficult to believe that the world is peopled to
any great extent. One fancies that Cain has just killed Abel, and that
there is need for the greatest economy in the matter of human life.

The night Ralph Hagadorn started out for Echo Bay he felt as if he were
the only man in the world, so complete was the solitude through which he
was passing. He was going over to attend the wedding of his best friend,
and was, in fact, to act as the groomsman. Business had delayed him, and
he was compelled to make his journey at night. But he hadn’t gone far
before he began to feel the exhilaration of the skater. His skates were
keen, his legs fit for a longer journey than the one he had undertaken,
and the tang of the frost was to him what a spur is to a spirited horse.

He cut through the air as a sharp stone cleaves the water. He could feel
the tumult of the air as he cleft it. As he went on he began to have
fancies. It seemed to him that he was enormously tall--a great Viking of
the Northland, hastening over icy fiords to his love. That reminded him
that he had a love--though, indeed, that thought was always present with
him as a background for other thoughts. To be sure, he had not told her
she was his love, because he had only seen her a few times and the
opportunity had not presented itself. She lived at Echo Bay, too, and
was to be the maid of honor to his friend’s bride--which was another
reason why he skated on almost as swiftly as the wind, and why, now and
then, he let out a shout of exhilaration.

The one drawback in the matter was that Marie Beaujeu’s father had
money, and that Marie lived in a fine house and wore otter skin about
her throat and little satin-lined mink boots on her feet when she went
sledding, and that the jacket in which she kept a bit of her dead
mother’s hair had a black pearl in it as big as a pea. These things
made it difficult--nay, impossible--for Ralph Hagadorn to say anything
more than “I love you.” But that much he meant to have the satisfaction
of saying, no matter what came of it.

With this determination growing upon him he swept along the ice which
gleamed under the starlight. Indeed, Venus made a glowing path toward
the west and seemed to reassure him. He was sorry he could not skim down
that avenue of light from the love star, but he was forced to turn his
back upon it and face toward the northeast.

It came to him with a shock that he was not alone. His eyelashes were a
good deal frosted and his eyeballs blurred with the cold, and at first
he thought it an illusion. But he rubbed his eyes hard and at length
made sure that not very far in front of him was a long white skater in
fluttering garments who sped over the snows fast as ever werewolf went.
He called aloud, but there was no answer, and then he gave chase,
setting his teeth hard and putting a tension on his firm young muscles.
But however fast he might go the white skater went faster. After a time
he became convinced, as he chanced to glance for a second at the North
Star, that the white skater was leading him out of his direct path. For
a moment he hesitated, wondering if he should not keep to his road, but
the strange companion seemed to draw him on irresistibly, and so he
followed.

Of course it came to him more than once that this might be no earthly
guide. Up in those latitudes men see strange things when the hoar frost
is on the earth. Hagadorn’s father, who lived up there with the Lake
Superior Indians and worked in the copper mines, had once welcomed a
woman at his hut on a bitter night who was gone by morning, and who left
wolf tracks in the snow--yes, it was so, and John Fontanelle, the
half-breed, could tell you about it any day--if he were alive. (Alack,
the snow where the wolf tracks were is melted now!)

Well, Hagadorn followed the white skater all the night, and when the ice
flushed red at dawn and arrows of lovely light shot up into the cold
heavens, she was gone, and Hagadorn was at his destination. Then, as he
took off his skates while the sun climbed arrogantly up to his place
above all other things, Hagadorn chanced to glance lakeward, and he saw
there was a great wind-rift in the ice and that the waves showed blue as
sapphires beside the gleaming ice. Had he swept along his intended path,
watching the stars to guide him, his glance turned upward, all his body
at magnificent momentum, he must certainly have gone into that cold
grave. The white skater had been his guardian angel!

Much impressed, he went up to his friend’s house, expecting to find
there the pleasant wedding furore. But someone met him quietly at the
door, and his friend came downstairs to greet him with a solemn
demeanor.

“Is this your wedding face?” cried Hagadorn. “Why, really, if this is
the way you are affected, the sooner I take warning the better.”

“There’s no wedding to-day,” said his friend.

“No wedding? Why, you’re not----”

“Marie Beaujeu died last night----”

“Marie----”

“Died last night. She had been skating in the afternoon, and she came
home chilled and wandering in her mind, as if the frost had got in it
somehow. She got worse and worse and talked all the time of you.”

“Of me?”

“We wondered what it all meant. We didn’t know you were lovers.”

“I didn’t know it myself; more’s the pity.”

“She said you were on the ice. She said you didn’t know about the big
breaking up, and she cried to us that the wind was off shore. Then she
cried that you could come in by the old French Creek if you only
knew----?”

“I came in that way,” interrupted Hagadorn.

“How did you come to do that? It’s out of your way.”

So Hagadorn told him how it came to pass.

And that day they watched beside the maiden, who had tapers at her head
and feet, and over in the little church the bride who might have been at
her wedding said prayers for her friend. Then they buried her in her
bridesmaid’s white, and Hagadorn was there before the altar with her, as
he intended from the first. At midnight the day of the burial her
friends were married in the gloom of the cold church, and they walked
together through the snow to lay their bridal wreaths on her grave.

Three nights later Hagadorn started back again to his home. They wanted
him to go by sunlight, but he had his way and went when Venus made her
bright path on the ice. He hoped for the companionship of the white
skater. But he did not have it. His only companion was the wind. The
only voice he heard was the baying of a wolf on the north shore. The
world was as white as if it had just been created and the sun had not
yet colored nor man defiled it.




HOW HE CAUGHT THE GHOST.


“Yes, the house is a good one,” said the agent; “it’s in a good
neighborhood, and you’re getting it at almost nothing; but I think it
right to tell you all about it. You are orphans, you say, and with a
mother dependent on you? That makes it all the more necessary that you
should know. The fact is, the house is said to be haunted----”

The agent could not help smiling as he said it, and he was relieved to
see an answering smile on the two faces before him.

“Ah, you don’t believe in ghosts,” he went on; “nor do I, for that
matter; but, somehow, the reputation of the house keeps me from having a
tenant long at a time. The place ought to rent for twice as much as it
does.”

“If we succeed in driving out the ghost, you will not raise the rent?”
asked the boy, with a merry twinkle in his eyes.

“Well, no--not this year, at any rate,” laughed the agent. And so the
house was rented; and the slip of a girl and the tall lad, her brother,
went their way.

Within a week the family had moved into the house, and were delighted
with it. It was large and cool, with wide halls and fine stairways, and
with more room than they needed. But that did not matter in the least,
for they had always been cramped in small houses, suffering many
discomforts; and they never could have afforded such a place as this if
it had not been “haunted.”

“Blessings on the ghost!” cried Margaret, gaily, as she ran about as
merry as a child. “Who would be without a ghost in the house, when it
brings one like this?”

“And it is so near your school,” said the mother; “and I used to worry
so over the long walk; and David can come home to lunch now, and you
don’t know what a pleasure that will be.”

“It seems to me,” David gravely explained, “that if I should meet the
ghost I would treat him with the greatest politeness and encourage him
to stay. We shall not miss the room he takes, shall we? I think it would
be well to set aside that room over yours, Maggie, for his ghostship’s
own, for we shall not need that, you know. Besides, the door doesn’t
shut, and he can go in and out without breaking the lock.”

And then they all laughed and had a great deal of fun over the ghost,
which was a great joke to them.

They were very tired that night and slept soundly all night long. When
they met the next morning there was more laughter about the ghost which
was shy about meeting strangers, probably, and had made no effort to
introduce himself. For the next three days they were all hard at work,
trying to bring chaos into something like order; and then it was time
for the school to open, and Margaret was to begin teaching, and David
inserted an advertisement in the city papers for a maid-of-all-work, who
might help their mother in their absence.

For one whole day prospective colored servants presented themselves and
announced:

“Is dis de house whar dey wants a worklady? No, ma’am, I ain’ gwine to
work in dis house. Ketch me workin’ in no ha’nted house.”

After which they each and all departed, and others came in their stead.
One was secured after a while, but no sooner had she talked across the
fence with a neighbor’s servant than she, too, departed.

“Never mind, children,” said Mrs. Craig, wearily, “I would much rather
do the work than be troubled in this way.”

So the maid-of-all-work was dismissed and the Craig family locked the
doors and went to their rooms, worn out with the day’s anxieties.

They had been in the house four days, and there had been neither sight
nor sound of the ghost. The very mention of it was enough to start them
all to laughing, for they were thoroughly practical people, with a
fondness for inquiring into anything that seemed mysterious to them and
for understanding it thoroughly before they let it go.

David was soon sleeping the sound sleep of healthy boyhood, and all was
silent in the house, when Margaret stole softly into his room and laid
her hand on his arm. He was not easy to waken, and several minutes had
passed before he sat up in bed with an articulate murmur of surprise.

“Hush!” said Margaret, in a whisper, with her hand on his lips. “I want
you to come into my room and listen to a sound that I have been hearing
for some time.”

“Doors creaking,” suggested David, as he began to dress.

“Nothing of the kind,” was all she said.

They walked up the stairway, and along the upper hall to the door of the
unused room. Something was wrong with the lock and the door would not
stay fastened, as I have said.

Something that was not fear thrilled their hearts as they pushed the
door further ajar, and stood where they could see every foot of the
vacant floor. One of their own boxes stood in the middle of the room,
but aside from that, nothing was to be seen, and they looked at one
another in silence.

“Hold the lamp a minute, Maggie,” David said, at last, and then he went
all over the room, and looked more particularly at its emptiness, and
even felt the walls.

“Secret panels, you know,” he said, with a smile, but it was a very
puzzled smile indeed.

“I can’t see what it could have been,” Margaret said, as they went down
the stairs.

“No, I can’t see, either, but I’m going to see,” said David. “That was a
chain, and chains don’t drag around by themselves, you know. A ghost
could not drag a chain, if he were to try.”

“The conventional ghost very often drags chains,” said Margaret, as she
closed the door of her room.

And then she lay awake all night and listened for the conventional ghost
that dragged a chain, but it seemed that the weight of the chain must
have wearied him, for he was not heard again.

The mother had slept through it all, and next morning they gave her a
vivid account of the night’s adventure.

“Perhaps it was someone in the house,” she said, in alarm. There were no
ghosts within the bounds of possibility, so far as she was concerned,
but burglars were very possible, indeed.

Then Margaret and David both laughed more than ever.

“What fun it would be,” said David, “for a burglar to get into this
house and try to find something worth carrying away!”

So they went on to the next night, all three fully determined to spend
the night in listening for the ghost, and running him to earth if
possible.

But it was Margaret that heard the ghost, after all. She had been
sleeping and was suddenly startled wide awake, and there, overhead, was
the sound of the chain dragging; and just as she was on the point of
springing out of bed to call her brother, the chain seemed to go out of
the upper room. She lay still and listened, and in a moment she heard it
again.

It was coming down the stairs.

There was no carpet on the stairs, and she could hear the chain drop
from step to step, until it had come the whole way down. There it was,
almost at the door of her room, and something that was strangely like
fear kept her lying still, listening in horrified silence.

Then it went along the hall, dragging close to the door; and then
further away; and back and forth for awhile; and then it began dragging
back up the stairs again. Step by step she could hear it drawn over the
edge of every step--and by the time it had reached the top she
remembered herself and called David.

Again did the brother and sister make a tour of the upper room, with the
lamp. Not only that, but they looked into every nook and corner of the
upper part of the house, and at last came back, baffled. They had seen
nothing extraordinary, and they had not heard a sound.

“I’m going to see that ghost to-night,” David said to his sister the
next evening.

“How?”

“I’m going to sit up all night at the head of the stairs. Don’t say
anything about it to mother; it might make her uneasy.”

So, after the household were all quiet, David slipped into his place at
the head of the stairs, and sat down to his vigil. He had placed a
screen at the head of the stairway so that it hid him from view--as if a
ghost cared for a screen--and he established himself behind it, and
prepared to be as patient as he could.

It seemed to him that hours so long had never been devised as those the
town clocks tolled off that night. He bore it until midnight moderately
well, because, he argued with himself, if there were any ghosts about
they would surely walk then; but they were not in a humor for walking;
and still the hours rolled on without any developments. He took the
fidgets, and had nervous twitches all over him, and at last he could
endure it no longer, and had leaned his head back against the wall and
was going blissfully to sleep when----

He heard a chain dragging just beyond the open door of that unused room.

In spite of himself a shiver ran down his back. There was no mistaking
it; it was a real chain, if he had ever heard one. More than that, it
had left the room, and was coming straight towards the stairs. The hall
was dark, and it was impossible for him to see anything, although he
strained his eyes in the direction of the sound. And even while he
looked it had passed behind the screen, and was going down the stairs,
dropping from step to step with a clank.

Half way down a narrow strip of moonlight from a stair-window lay
directly across the steps. Whatever the thing was, it must pass through
that patch of light, and David leaned forward and watched.

Down it went from step to step, and presently it had slipped through the
light, and was down; and a little later it came back again, through the
light, and up the stairs, and back into that unused room.

And then David slapped his knees jubilantly, and ran down to his room,
and slept all the rest of the night.

Next morning he was very mysterious about his discoveries of the night
before.

“Oh, yes, I saw the ghost,” he said to Maggie. “There; don’t ask so many
questions; I’ll tell you more about it to-morrow, maybe.”

And that was all the information she could get from him. It was very
provoking.

That day David made a purchase down town and brought home a bulky
bundle, which he hid in his own room and would not let his sister even
peep at.

“I’m going to try to catch a ghost to-night,” he said, “and you know how
it is; if I brag too much beforehand, I shall be sure to fail.”

He was working with something in the hall after the others had retired;
but he did not sit up this time. He went to bed, and Margaret listened
at his door and found that he was soon asleep.

But away in the night they were all awakened by a squealing that brought
them all into the hall in a great hurry; and there, at the head of the
stairs, they found the huge rat-trap that David had set a few hours
before, and in the midst of the toils was a rat.

“Why, David,” exclaimed the mother, “I didn’t know that there was a rat
in the house.”

And then, all at once, she saw that there was a long chain hanging from
a little iron collar around the creature’s neck, and she and Margaret
cried together.

“And this was the ghost!”

Such a funny ghost when they came to think of it--this poor rat, with a
nest in some hole of the broken chimney. He had been someone’s pet,
once, perhaps; and now, the households he had broken up, the nights he
had disturbed, the wild sensations he had created--it made his captors
laugh to think that this innocent creature had been the cause of the
whole trouble.

“I’ll get a cage for him, and take care of him for the rest of his
life,” said David. “We owe him so much that we can’t afford to be
ungrateful.”

The next morning he took the ghost-in-a-cage and showed it to the agent,
and gave him a vivid account of the capture.

“So, you have a good house for about half price, all on account of that
rat,” exclaimed the agent, grimly. “Young man--but never mind, you
deserve it. What are you working for now? Six dollars a week? If you
ever want to change your place--suppose you come around here. I think
you need a business that will give you a chance to grow.”

And the agent and David shook hands warmly over the cage of the
“ghost.”




GRAND-DAME’S GHOST STORY.

BY C. D.


I don’t know whether you ever tell your children ghost stories or not;
some mothers don’t, but our mother, though of German descent, was
strong-minded on the ghost subject, and early taught all of her children
to be fearless mentally as well as physically, and, though dearly fond
of hearing ghost stories, especially if they were real true ghosts, we
were sadly skeptical as to their being anything of the kind that could
harm. We were quite learned in ghostly lore, knew all about
“doppeigangers,” “Will o’ the Wisp,” “blue lights,” etc., and we could
not have a greater treat for good behavior than for our mother to draw
on her store of supernatural tales for our entertainment. The story I am
about to relate she told us one stormy night, when, gathered round her
chair in her own cozy sanctum, before a cheerful fire, we ate nuts and
apples, and listened while she recited “an o’er true tale,” told her by
her grandmother, who herself witnessed the vision:

It was a fearful night, the wind sobbed and wailed round the house like
lost spirits mourning their doom; the rain beat upon the casements, and
the trees, writhing in the torture of the fierce blast, groaned and
swayed until their tops almost swept the earth; bright flashes of
lightning pierced even through the closed shutters and heavy curtains,
and the thunder had a sullen, threatening roar that made your blood
creep. It was a night to make one seek to shut out all sound, draw the
curtains close, stir the fire and nestle deep in the arm-chair before
it, with feet upon the fender, and have something cheerful to think or
talk about. But I was all alone; none in the house with me but the
servants, and the servants’ wing was detached from the main part of the
building, for I do not care to have menials near me, and I had no loved
ones near.

It was just such a night that Nancy Black died. “What a fearful night
for the soul to leave its earthly home and go out into the vast, unknown
future!” I spoke aloud, as, rousing from a train of thought, I drew my
heavy mantle closer round me, wheeled my arm-chair nearer the fire, and
cuddled down in it, burying my feet in the foot-cushion to warm them,
for I felt strangely cold. I was in the library; it was my usual
sitting-room, for I seldom used the parlors. What was the use? My books
were my friends, and I loved best to be with them. My children dead, or
married and away, the cold, grand parlors always seemed gloomy and sad;
the ghosts of departed pleasures haunted them, and I cared not to enter
them.

It was a long, wide room across the hall from the parlors, running the
whole length of the house, and was lined with shelves from floor to
ceiling. My husband’s father had been a bibliomaniac, and my husband had
had a leaning that way also, and the shelves held many an old rare work
that was worth its weight in gold. The fire, though burning brightly,
did not illume one-half the room of which, sitting in the chimney
corner, I commanded a full view, and had been looking at the shadows
playing on the furniture and shelves, as the flame shot up, and after
flickering a moment, would die out, leaving a gloom which would break
away into fantastic shadows as the firelight would again shoot up.

While watching the gleams of light and darkling shades, unconsciously
the wailing of the storm outside attracted my attention, there seemed to
be odd noises of tapping on the windows, and sobs and sighs, as though
someone was entreating entrance from the fierce tumult; and as I sat
there, again I thought of Nancy Black, the old schoolgirl friend who had
loved me so dearly, and the night when she went forth to meet the doom
appointed her; resting my head upon my hand, I sat gazing in the fire,
thinking over her strange life, and still stranger death, and wondering
what could have become of the money and jewels that I knew she had once
possessed.

While sitting thus, a queer sensation crept over me; it was not fear,
but a feeling as though if I’d look up I’d see something frightful; a
shiver, not like that of cold, ran from my head to my feet, and a
sensation as though someone was breathing icy cold breath upon my
forehead, the same feeling you would cause by holding a piece of ice to
your cheek; it fluttered over my face and finally settled round my lips,
as though the unseen one was caressing me, thrilling me with horror. But
I am not fearful, nervous nor imaginative, and resolutely throwing off
the dread that fell upon me, I turned round and looked up, and there, so
close by my side that my hand, involuntarily thrown out, passed through
her seeming form, stood Nancy Black. It was Nancy Black, and yet not
Nancy Black; her whole body had a semi-transparent appearance, just as
your hand looks when you hold it between yourself and a strong light;
her clothing, apparently the same as worn in life, had a wavy, seething,
flickering look, like flames have, and yet did not seem to burn.

“In the name of God, Nancy Black, what brought you here, and whence came
you?” I exclaimed.

A hollow whisper followed:

“Thank you, my old friend, for speaking to me, and, oh, how deeply I
thank you for thinking of me to-night--I shall have rest.”

Rest! I heard echoed, and a jeering laugh rang through the room that
made her quiver at its sound.

“I have been near you often; but always failed to find you in a
condition when you would be en rapport before to-night. What I came for
I will tell you; whence I come, you need not know; suffice it to say,
that were I happy I would not be here on such an errand, nor on such a
night--it is only when the elements are in a tumult, and the winds wail
and moan, that we come forth. When you hear these sounds it is souls of
the lost you hear mourning their doom--’tis then they wander up and
down, to and fro, their only release from their fearful home of torture
and undying pain.

“I have come to tell you that you must go over to the old house, and in
the back room I always kept locked, have the carpet taken up from toward
the fireplace. You will see a plank with a knot-hole in it. Remove that,
and you will find what caused me to lose my soul--have prayers said for
me, for ’tis well to pray for the dead. The money and jewels give in
charity; bury in holy ground the others you find, and pray for them and
me. Ah! Jeannette, you thought your old friend, though strange and odd,
pure and innocent. It is a bitter part of my punishment that I must
change your thought of me. Farewell! Do not fail me, and I shall trouble
you no more. But whenever you hear that wind howl and sweep round the
house as it does to-night, know that the lost are near. It is their
swift flight through space--fleeing before the scourge of memory and
conscience--that causes that sound.

“That to-morrow you may not think you are dreaming, here is a token,”
and she touched the palm of my hand with her finger-tips, and as you
see, my child, to this day, there are three crimson spots in the palm of
my hand that nothing will eradicate.

“Do not fail me, and pray for us, Jeannette, pray,” and with a longing,
wistful gaze, and a deep, sobbing sigh, Nancy Black faded from my sight.

“Am I dreaming?” I exclaimed, as I rose from my chair and rang the bell.
When the servant entered, I bade him attend to the fire and light the
lamps, and I went through the room to see if any unusual arrangement of
the furniture could have caused the appearance, but nothing was
apparent, and I bade him send my maid to attend me in my chamber, for I
could not help feeling unwilling to remain in the library any longer
that evening.

While making my toilet for the night my maid said:

“Have you burned your hand, madam?”

Glancing hastily down, I saw three dark crimson spots upon the palm of
my left hand. They had an odd look, seared as though touched by a
red-hot iron, yet the flesh was soft, not burned and not painful. Making
some excuse for it, I did not allude to it again, and dismissed her
speedily, that I might reflect undisturbed over the singular occurrence.
There were the marks upon my hand; I could not remove them, and they did
not fade. In fact, their deep red made the rest of the palm lose its
pinkish hue and look pale from the strong contrast. Could I have been
asleep and dreamed it all, and by any means have done this to myself? I
thought, but finally concluded that on the morrow I’d go over to Nancy
Black’s old residence and settle the question; and with that conclusion
had to content myself until the morrow came.

Nancy Black was an old friend from my girlhood, who had owned large
property in the town, and lived all alone in a spacious stone house
directly opposite my home, and who, when dying, had left me the sole
legatee of her property.

When morning came I took the keys, and, with my maid, went over to
Nancy’s house. It had never been disturbed since her death, which was
sudden and somewhat singular, and the furniture remained just as she
left it when taken to her last resting place. We went to the room Nancy
had directed. I bade Sarah take up the carpet, and, sure enough, there
was a plank with a knot-hole in it; so I sent her from the room, and
lifted the plank myself, and there, between the two joints, rested a
long box, the lid not fastened. Opening it, I was horrified to see two
skeletons--those of an infant and of a woman, small in stature and
delicate frame. In a moment it flashed before me that I saw all that
remained of Nancy Black’s young sister, a girl of seventeen, who had
left home somewhat mysteriously years ago, and had died while absent--at
least, that was the version Nancy had given of her absence, and no one
had dreamed of doubting it, her tale was so naturally told.

Left orphans when Lucy was only two years and Nancy eighteen, she had
devoted her life to the care of this young girl, and when she found her
sister had fallen, she, in her pride of name and position, had destroyed
mother and child, that her shame might not be known, and had lived all
those dreary years in that house with her fearful secret.

Round the box, heaped up on every side, were money and jewels, and a
parchment scroll among them had written on it: “Lucy’s share of our
father’s estate.” I carried out Nancy’s wishes to the letter, for I now
firmly believed that she had come to me herself that night. To avoid
scandal resting on the dead, I took our clergyman into my confidence,
and with his assistance had the remains buried quietly in consecrated
ground. The money and jewels were given to the poor, and the old
building I turned into a home for destitute females; and morning and
night, as I kneel in prayer, I pray forgiveness to rest upon Nancy Black
and peace to her troubled soul.




A FIGHT WITH A GHOST.

BY Q. E. D.


“No, I never believed much in ghosts,” said the doctor. “But I was
always rather afraid of them.”

“Have you ever seen one?” asked one of the other men.

The doctor took his cigar out of his mouth and contemplated the ash for
a moment or two before replying. “I have had some rather startling
experiences,” he said, after a pause, during which the rest of us
exchanged glances, for the doctor has seen many things and is not averse
to talking about them in congenial company. “Would you care about
hearing one of them? It gives me the cold shivers now to speak of it.”
We nodded, and the doctor, taking a sip as an antidote to the shivers,
began:

“You remember George Carson, who played for the ‘Varsity some years ago;
big chap, with a light mustache? Well, I saw a good deal of him before
he married, while he was reading for the bar in town. It was just after
he became engaged to Miss Stonor, who is now Mrs. Carson, that he asked
me to go down to a place which his people had taken in the country. Miss
Stonor was to be there and he wanted me to meet her. I could not go down
for Christmas Day, as I had promised to be with my people. But as I had
been working a bit too hard, and wanted a few days’ rest, I decided to
run down for a few days about the New Year.

“Woodcote was a pleasant enough place to look at. There were two packs
of hounds within easy distance, and it was not far enough from a station
to cut you off completely from the morning papers. The Carsons had been
lucky, I thought, in coming across such a good house at such a moderate
figure. For, as George told me, the owner had been obliged to go abroad
for his health, and was anxious not to leave the place empty all the
winter. It was an old house, with big gables and preposterous corners
all over the place, and you couldn’t walk ten paces along any of the
passages without tumbling up or down stairs. But it had been patched
from time to time and, among other improvements, a big billiard-room had
been built out at the back. A country house in the winter without a
billiard-room, when the frost stops hunting, is just--well, not even a
gilded prison. The party was a small one; besides George and his father
and mother, there were only a couple of Misses Carson, who, being
somewhere in the early teens, didn’t count, and Miss Stonor, who, of
course, counted a good deal, and, lastly, myself.

“Miss Stonor ought to have been happy, for George Carson, besides being
an excellent fellow all around, was by no means a bad match, being an
only son with considerable expectations. But, somehow or other, she did
not strike me as looking either very well or very happy. She gave me the
impression of having something on her mind, which made her alternately
nervous and listless. George, I fancied, noticed it, and was puzzled by
it, for I caught him several times watching her with an anxious and
inquiring look, but, as I was not there as a doctor, of course it was no
business of mine, though I discovered the reason before I left Woodcote.

“The second night after my arrival--we had been playing, I remember, a
family pool; the rest had gone upstairs to bed--George and I adjourned
to a sort of study, which he had arranged upstairs, for a final smoke
and a chat before turning in. The study was next to his bedroom, and
parted off from it by curtains. As we were settling down I missed my
pipe, and remembered that I had laid it down in the billiard-room. On
principle I never smoke another man’s pipe, so I lit a candle, the house
being in darkness, and started away in search of my own. The house
looked awfully weird by the flickering light of a solitary candle, and
the stairs creaked in a particularly gruesome way behind me, just for
all the world as though someone were following at my heels. I found my
pipe where I had expected in the billiard-room, and came back in perhaps
a little more hurry than was absolutely necessary. Which, perhaps,
explains why I stumbled in the uncertain light over a couple of
unforeseen stairs, and dropped my candle. Of course it went out, but
after a little groping I found it. Having no matches with me I was
obliged to feel my way along the banisters, for it was so dark that I
could not see my hand in front of me. And as I slowly advanced, sliding
my hand along the broad balustrade at my side, it suddenly slid over
something cold and clammy, which was not balustrade at all; for,
stopping dead, and closing my fingers round it for an instant, I felt
that I was holding another hand, a skinny, bony hand, which writhed
itself slowly from my grasp. And though I could hear nothing and see
nothing, I was yet conscious that something was brushing past me and
going up the stairs.

“‘Hi--what’s that? Who are you?’ I called.

“There was no answer.

“I admit that I was in a regular funk. I must have shown it in my face.

“‘What’s the matter?’ asked George, as I blundered into his study.

“‘Oh, nothing,’ I answered; ‘dropped my candle and lost the way.’

“‘But who were you talking to?’

“‘I was only swearing at the candle,’ I replied.

“‘Oh! I thought perhaps you had seen--somebody,’ replied George.

“Somehow I did not like to tell him the truth, for fear he would laugh
at my nervousness. But I determined to keep an eye on my liver, and take
a couple of weeks’ complete rest. That night I woke up several times
with the feeling of that confounded hand under my own--a clammy hand
which writhed as my fingers closed upon it.

“The next morning after breakfast I was in the billiard-room practicing
strokes while Carson was over at the stables. Presently the door opened,
and Miss Stonor looked in.

“‘Come in,’ I said; ‘George will be back from the stables in a few
minutes. Meanwhile we can have fifty up.’

“‘I wanted to speak to you,’ she said.

“She was looking very tired and ill, and I began to think I should not
have an uninterrupted holiday after all.

“‘Do you believe in ghosts?’ she asked, having closed the door and come
up to the table, where she stood leaning with both her hands upon it.

“‘No,’ I replied, missing an easy carrom as I remembered my experience
of last night, ‘but I believe in fancy.’

“‘And, supposing then that a person fancied he saw things, is there any
remedy?’

“‘What do you mean, Miss Stonor?’ I replied, looking at her in some
surprise. ‘Do you mean that you fancy----’

“I stopped, for Miss Stonor turned away, sat down on one of the
easy-chairs by the wall, and burst into tears.

“‘Oh! please help me’ she sobbed; ‘I believe I am going mad.’

“I laid down my cue and went over to her.

“‘Look here, Miss Stonor,’ I said, taking her hand, which was hot and
feverish, ‘I am a doctor, and a friend of George. Now tell me all about
it, and I’ll do my best to set it right.’

“She was in a more or less hysterical condition, and her words were
freely punctuated by sobs. But gradually I managed to elicit from her
that nearly every night since she came to Woodcote she had been awakened
in some mysterious way, and had seen a horrible face looking at her from
over the top of a screen which stood by the door of her bedroom. As soon
as she moved the face disappeared, which convinced her that the
apparition existed only in her imagination. That seemed to distress her
even more than if she had believed it to be a genuine ghost, for she
thought her brain was giving way.

“I told her that she was only suffering from a very common symptom of
nervous disorder, as indeed it was, and promised to send a groom into
the village to get a prescription made up for her. And, having made me
promise to breathe no word to anyone on the subject, more especially to
George, she went away relieved. Nevertheless, I was not quite certain
that I had made a correct diagnosis of the case. You see I had been
rather upset myself not many hours before. George was longer than I
expected at the stable, and I was just going to find him when at the
door I met Mrs. Carson.

“‘Can you spare me one moment?’ she said, as I held open the door for
her. ‘I wanted to find you alone.’

“‘Certainly, Mrs. Carson, with pleasure; an hour, if you wish,’ I
replied.

“‘It is so convenient, you know, to have a doctor in the house,’ she
said, with a nervous laugh. ‘Now I want you to prescribe me a sleeping
draught. My nerves are rather out of order, and--I don’t sleep as I
should.’

“‘Ah,’ I said, ‘do you see faces--and such like things when you wake?’

“‘How do you know?’ she asked quickly.

“‘Oh, I inferred from the other symptoms. We doctors have to observe all
kinds of little things.’

“‘Well, of course, I know it is only fancy; but it is just as bad as if
it were real. I assure you it is making me quite ill; and I didn’t like
to mention it to Mr. Carson or to George. They would think I was losing
my head.’

“I gave Mrs. Carson the same prescription as I had written for Miss
Stonor, though by that time the conviction had grown upon me that there
was something wrong which could not be cured by medicine. However, I
decided to say nothing to George about the matter at present. For I
could hardly utilize the confidence which had been placed in me by Miss
Stonor and Mrs. Carson. And my own experience of the night before would
scarcely have appeared convincing to him. But I determined that on the
next day--which was Sunday--I would invent an excuse for staying at home
from church and make some explorations in the house. There was obviously
some mystery at work which wanted clearing up.

“We all sat up rather late that night. There seemed to be a general
disinclination to go to bed. We stayed all together in the billiard-room
until nearly midnight, and then loitered about in the hall, talking in
an aimless sort of fashion. But at last Mrs. Carson said good-night,
with a confidential nod to me, and Miss Stonor murmured, ‘So many
thanks; I’ve got it,’ and they both went upstairs. George and I parted
in the corridor above. Our rooms were opposite each other.

“I did not begin undressing at once, but sat down and tried to piece
together some theory to account for the uncanniness of things. But the
more I thought, the more perplexing it became. There was no doubt
whatever that I had put my hand on something extremely alive and
extremely unpleasant the night before. The bare recollection of it made
me shudder. What living thing could possibly be creeping about the house
in the dark? It was a man’s hand. Of that I was certain from the size of
it. George Carson was out of the question, for he was in his room all
the time. Nor was it likely that Mr. Carson, senior, would steal about
his own house in his socks and refuse to answer when spoken to. The only
other man in the house was an eminently respectable-looking butler; and
his hand, as I had noted particularly when he poured out my wine at
dinner, was plump and soft, whereas the mysterious hand on the
balustrade was thin and bony. And then, what was the real explanation of
the face which had appeared to the two ladies? Indigestion might have
explained either singly. Extraordinary coincidences do sometimes occur,
but it seemed too extraordinary that a couple of ladies--one old and one
young--should suffer from the same indigestion in the same house, at the
same time, and with the same symptoms. On the whole, I did not feel at
all comfortable, and looked carefully in all the cupboards and recesses,
as well as under the bed, before starting to undress. Then I went to the
door, intending to lock it. Just as my hand was upon the key, I heard a
soft step in the corridor outside, accompanied by a sound which was
something between a sigh and a groan. Very faint, but quite
unmistakable, and, under the circumstances, discomposing. It might, of
course, be George. Anyhow, I decided to look and see. I turned the
handle gently and opened the door. There was nothing to be seen in the
corridor. But on the opposite side I could see a door open, and George’s
head peeping round the corner.

“‘Hullo!’ he said.

“‘Hullo!’ I replied.

“‘Was that you walking up the passage?’ he asked.

“‘No,’ I answered, ‘I thought it might be you.’

“‘Then who the devil was it?’ he said. ‘I’ll swear I heard someone.’

“There was silence for a few moments. I was wondering whether I had
better tell him of the fright I had already had, when he spoke again:

“‘I say, just come here for a bit, old fellow; I want to speak to you.’

“I stepped across the passage, and we went together into the little
study which adjoined his bedroom.

“‘Look here,’ he said, poking up the fire, which was burning low,
‘doesn’t it strike you that there is something very odd about this
house?’

“‘You mean----’

“‘Well, I wouldn’t say anything about it to the master or Miss Stonor
for fear of frightening them. All the same, scarcely a night passes but
I hear curious footsteps on the stairs. You’ve heard them yourself,
haven’t you?’

“‘Now you mention it,’ I said, ‘I confess I have.’

“‘And, what is more,’ he continued, ‘I was sitting here two nights ago
half asleep, and--it seems ridiculous, I know, but it’s a fact--I
suddenly saw a horrible face glaring at me from between those curtains
behind you. It was gone in a moment, but I saw it as plainly as I see
you.’

“I moved my seat uneasily.

“‘Did you look in your bedroom or in the passage?’ I asked.

“‘Yes--at once,’ he replied. ‘There was nothing to be seen; but twice
again that night I heard footsteps passing--good God!’

“He started up in his chair, staring straight over my shoulder. I turned
quickly and saw the curtains which parted off the bedroom swing
together.

“‘What is it?’ I asked, breathlessly.

“‘I saw it again--the same face--between the curtains.’

“I tore the hangings aside, and rushed into the next room. It was empty.
The lamp was burning upon a side table, and the door was open, just as
George had left it. In the passage outside all was quiet. I came back
into the study and found George running his fingers through his hair in
perplexity.

“‘There is clearly one person too many in the house,’ I said. ‘I think
we ought to draw the place and find out who it is.’

“‘All right,’ said he, picking up the poker from the fireplace; ‘if it’s
anything made of flesh and blood this will be useful, and if not----’

“He stopped short, for at that instant the most awful shriek of horror
rang through the house--a shriek of wild, uncontrollable terror, such as
I had never heard before and I never hope to hear again. One moment we
stood staring at each other, dumbfounded. The next George Carson had
dashed out of the room and down the corridor to the stairs. I followed
close behind him. For we both knew that none but a woman in mortal fear
would shriek like that, and that that woman was Miss Stonor.

“Down the stairs we tumbled pell-mell in the darkness. But before I
reached the landing below, where Miss Stonor’s room was, I felt, as I
had felt the evening before, something brush swiftly past me. As I ran I
turned and caught at it in the dark. But my hand gripped only empty air.
I was just about to turn back and follow it, when a cry from George
arrested me, and, looking down, I saw him standing over the prostrate
form of Miss Stonor. The door of her room was open, and by the moonlight
which streamed into the room I could see her lying in her white
nightdress across the threshold. What followed in the next few minutes
I can scarcely recall with accuracy. The whole house was aroused by the
poor girl’s awful shriek. She was quite unconscious when we came upon
her, but she revived more or less as soon as Mrs. Carson and one of the
terrified servants had lifted her into bed again. Nothing intelligible
could be gathered from her, however, as to the cause of her fright; she
only repeated, hysterically, again and again:

“‘Oh, the face; the face!’

“When I saw I could do her no further good for the present, I took
George by the arm and led him out of the room.

“‘Look here, George,’ I said, ‘we must find out the reason of this at
once. I am certain I felt something go by me as I came downstairs. Now
does that staircase lead anywhere but to our rooms?’

“George considered for a moment.

“‘Yes,’ he replied; ‘there is a door at the end of the passage which
leads up into a sort of lumber room.’

“‘Then we’ll explore it,’ I said. ‘For my part I can’t go to sleep until
I’ve got to the bottom of this. Get the man to bring a lantern along.’

“The butler looked as though he didn’t half like the enterprise, and, to
tell the truth, no more did I. It was the uncanniest job I ever
undertook. However, we started, the three of us. First of all we
searched the rooms on the floor above, where George and I slept.
Everything was just as we had left it. Then I pushed open the door at
the end of the corridor. A crazy-looking staircase led up into darkness.
We went cautiously up, I first with a candle, then George, and last of
all the butler with a lantern. At the top we stepped into a big, rather
low room, with beams across the ceiling, and a rough, uneven floor. Our
lights threw strange shadows into the corners, and more than once I
started at what looked like a crouching human figure. We searched every
corner. There was nothing to be seen but a few old boxes, a roll or two
of matting, and some broken chairs. But in the far corner George pointed
out to me a rickety ladder which ended at a closed trap-door. Just then
I distinctly heard the curious, half groaning, half sighing sound which
had already puzzled me in the corridor below. We stood still and looked
at one another. We all heard the sound.

“‘Whatever it is, it’s up there,’ I said. ‘The question is, who is going
up?’

“George put his candle down upon the floor and stepped upon the ladder.
It cracked beneath his weight. He stopped.

“‘Come down; it won’t bear you,’ I said. ‘I shall have to go.’

“I don’t know that I was ever in such a queer funk as I was while I
slowly mounted that ladder, and pushed open the trap-door. I had formed
no clear idea of what I expected to find there. Certainly I was not
prepared for what happened. For no sooner was the trap-door fully open
than there fell--literally fell--upon me from the darkness above a thing
in human shape, which kicked and spat and tore at me as I stood clinging
to the ladder. It lasted but a moment or so, but in that moment I lived
a lifetime of terror. The ladder swayed and cracked beneath me, and I
fell to the floor with the thing gripping my throat like a vise. The
next instant George had stunned it with a blow from the poker and
dragged it off me. It lay upon its back on the floor--a ragged, hideous,
loathsome shape. And the mystery was solved.”

“But you haven’t told us what it really was,” said one of the listeners.

The doctor smiled.

“It was the owner of the house,” he replied. “He had not gone abroad. He
had gone to a private lunatic asylum with homicidal mania upon him.
About a fortnight before this he had managed to escape; and, having made
his way to his former home, had concealed himself, with a cunning often
shown by lunatics, in the loft. I suppose he had found enough to eat in
his nightly rambles about the house. The only wonder is that he didn’t
kill someone before he was caught.”




COLONEL HALIFAX’S GHOST STORY.


I had just come back to England, after having been some years in India,
and was looking forward to meet my friends, among whom there was none I
was more anxious to see than Sir Francis Lynton. We had been to Eton
together, and for the short time I had been at Oxford, before entering
the army, we had been at the same college. Then we had parted. He came
into the title and estates of the family in Yorkshire on the death of
his grandfather--his father had predeceased--and I had been over a good
part of the world. One visit, indeed, I had made him in his Yorkshire
home, before leaving for India, of but a few days.

It will be easily imagined how pleasant it was, two or three days after
my arrival in London, to receive a letter from Lynton, saying that he
had just seen in the papers that I had arrived, and, begging me to come
down at once to Byfield, his place in Yorkshire.

“You are not to tell me,” he said, “that you cannot come. In fact, you
are to come on Monday. I have a couple of horses which will just suit
you; the carriage shall meet you at Packham, and all you have got to do
is to put yourself in the train which leaves Kings Cross at twelve
o’clock.”

Accordingly, on the day appointed, I started, in due time reached
Packham, losing much time on a detestable branch line, and there found
the dog-cart of Sir Francis awaiting me. I drove at once to Byfield.

The house I remembered. It was a low gable structure of no great size,
with old-fashioned lattice windows, separated from the park, where were
deer, by a charming terraced garden.

No sooner did the wheels crunch the gravel by the principal entrance,
than, almost before the bell was rung, the porch-door opened, and there
stood Lynton himself, whom I had not seen for so many years, hardly
altered, and with all the joy of welcome beaming in his face. Taking me
by both hands, he drew me into the house, got rid of my hat and wraps,
looked me all over, and then, in a breath, began to say how glad he was
to see me, what a real delight it was to have got me at last under his
roof, and what a good time we would have together, like the old days
over again.

He had sent my luggage up to my room, which was ready for me, and he
bade me make haste and dress for dinner.

So saying he took me through a paneled hall, up an old oak staircase,
and showed me my room, which, hurried as I was, I observed was hung
with tapestry, and had a large four-post bed, with velvet curtains,
opposite the window.

They had gone in to dinner when I came down, despite all the haste I
made in dressing; but a place had been kept for me next Lady Lynton.

Besides my hosts, there were their two daughters, Colonel Lynton, a
brother of Sir Francis, the chaplain, and some others, whom I do not
remember distinctly.

After dinner there was some music in the hall, and a game of whist in
the drawing-room, and after the ladies had gone upstairs, Lynton and I
retired to the smoking-room, where we sat up talking the better part of
the night. I think it must have been near three when I retired. Once in
bed I slept so soundly that my servant’s entrance the next morning
failed to arouse me, and it was past nine when I awoke.

After breakfast and the disposal of the newspapers, Lynton retired to
his letters, and I asked Lady Lynton if one of her daughters might show
me the house. Elizabeth, the eldest, was summoned, and seemed in no way
to dislike the task.

The house was, as already intimated, by no means large; it occupied
three sides of a square, the entrance and one end of the stables making
the fourth side. The interior was full of interest--passages, rooms,
galleries, as well as hall, were paneled in dark wood and hung with
pictures. I was shown everything on the ground

[Illustration: “_Losing much time on a detestable branch line._”]

floor, and then on the first floor. Then my guide proposed that we
should ascend a narrow, twisting staircase that led to a gallery. We did
as proposed, and entered a handsome long room or passage leading to a
small chamber at one end, in which my guide told me her father kept
books and papers.

I asked if anyone slept in this gallery, as I noticed a bed and
fireplace, and rods by means of which curtains might be drawn, enclosing
one portion where were bed and fireplace, so as to convert it into a
very cosy chamber.

She answered “No;” the place was not really used, except as a playroom;
though, sometimes, if the house happened to be very full--in her
great-grandfather’s time--she had heard that it had been occupied.

By the time we had been over the house, and I had also been shown the
garden and the stables, and introduced to the dogs, it was nearly one
o’clock. We were to have an early luncheon, and to drive afterwards to
see the ruins of one of the grand old Yorkshire abbeys.

This was a pleasant expedition, and we got back just in time for tea,
after which there was some reading aloud. The evening passed much in the
same way as the preceding one, except that Lynton, who had some
business, did not go down into the smoking-room, and I took the
opportunity of retiring early in order to write a letter for the Indian
mail, something having been said as to the prospect of hunting the next
day.

I had finished my letter, which was a long one, together with two or
three others, and had just got into bed, when I heard a step overhead,
as of someone walking along the gallery, which I now knew ran
immediately above my room. It was a slow, heavy, measured tread which I
could hear getting gradually louder and nearer, and then as gradually
fading away, as it retreated into the distance.

I was startled for a moment, having been told that the gallery was
unused; but the next instant it occurred to me that I had been told it
communicated with a chamber where Sir Francis kept books and papers. I
knew he had some writing to do, and I thought no more on the matter.

I was down the next morning at breakfast in good time. “How late you
were last night,” I said to Lynton, in the middle of breakfast. “I heard
you overhead after one o’clock.”

Lynton replied rather shortly: “Indeed you did not, for I was in bed
last night before twelve.”

“There was someone certainly moving overhead last night,” I answered,
“for I heard his steps as distinctly as I ever heard anything in my life
going down the gallery.”

Upon which Colonel Lynton remarked that he had often fancied he had
heard steps on the staircase, when he knew that no one was about. He was
apparently disposed to say more, when his brother interrupted him
somewhat curtly, as I fancied, and asked me if I should feel inclined
after breakfast to have a horse and go out and look for the hounds. They
met a considerable way off, but if they did not find in the coverts they
would first draw, a thing not improbable, they would come our way, and
we might fall in with them about one o’clock and have a run. I said
there was nothing I should like better. Lynton mounted me on a very nice
chestnut, and the rest of the party having gone out shooting, and the
young ladies being otherwise engaged, he and I started about eleven
o’clock for our ride.

It was a beautiful day, soft, with a bright sun, one of those beautiful
days which so frequently occur in the early part of November.

On reaching the hilltop where Lynton had expected to meet the hounds, no
trace of them was to be discovered. They must have found at once, and
run in a different direction. At three o’clock, after we had eaten our
sandwiches, Lynton reluctantly abandoned all hopes of falling in with
the hounds, and said we would return home by a slightly different route.

We had not descended the hill before we came on an old chalk quarry and
the remains of a disused kiln.

I recollected the spot at once. I had been here with Sir Francis on my
former visit, many years ago. “Why, bless me!” said I; “do you remember,
Lynton, what happened here when I was with you before? There had been
men engaged removing chalk, and they came on a skeleton under some depth
of rubble. We went together to see it removed, and you said you would
have it preserved till it could be examined by some ethnologist or
anthropologist, any one of those dry-as-dusts, to decide whether the
remains were dolichocephalous or brachycephalous--whether British,
Danish, or--modern. What was the result?”

Sir Francis hesitated a moment, and then answered, “It is true, I had
the remains removed.”

“Was there an inquest?”

“No. I had been opening some of the tumuli on the Wolds. I had sent a
crouched skeleton and some skulls to the Scarsborough museum. This, I
was doubtful about--whether it was a prehistoric interment--in fact, to
what date it belonged. No one thought of an inquest.”

On reaching the house, one of the grooms who took the horses, in answer
to a question from Lynton, said that Colonel and Mrs. Hampshire had
arrived about an hour ago, and that, one of the horses being lame, the
carriage in which they had driven over from Castle Frampton was to put
up for the night. In the drawing-room we found Lady Lynton pouring out
tea for her husband’s sister and her husband, who, as we came in,
exclaimed: “We have come to beg a night’s lodging.”

It appeared that they had been on a visit in the neighborhood, and had
been obliged to leave at a moment’s notice in consequence of a sudden
death in the house where they were staying, and that, in the
impossibility of getting a fly, their hosts had sent them over to
Byfield.

“We thought,” Mrs. Hampshire went on to say, “that as we were coming
here the end of next week, you would not mind having us a little sooner;
or that, if the house were quite full, you would be willing to put us up
anywhere till Monday, and let us come back later.”

Lady Lynton interposed with the remark that it was all settled; and
then, turning to her husband, added: “But I want to speak to you for a
moment.”

They both left the room together.

Lynton came back almost immediately, and, making an excuse to show me,
on a map in the hall, the point to which we had ridden, said, as soon as
we were alone, with a look of considerable annoyance: “I am afraid we
must ask you to change your room. Shall you mind very much? I think we
can make you quite comfortable upstairs in the gallery, which is the
only room available. Lady Lynton has had a good fire lit; the place is
really not cold, and it will be only for a night or two. Your servant
has been told to put your things together, but Lady Lynton did not like
to give orders to have them actually moved before my speaking to you.”

I assured him that I did not mind in the very least; that I should be
quite as comfortable upstairs; but that I did mind very much their
making such a fuss about a matter of that sort with an old friend like
myself.

Certainly nothing could look more comfortable than my new lodging when I
went upstairs to dress. There was a bright fire in the large grate, an
arm-chair had been drawn up beside it, and all my books and writing
things had been put in, with a reading-lamp in the central position, and
the heavy tapestry curtains were drawn, converting this part of the
gallery into a room to itself. Indeed, I felt somewhat inclined to
congratulate myself on the change. The spiral staircase had been one
reason against this place having been given to the Hampshires. No lady’s
long dress trunk could have mounted it.

Sir Francis was necessarily a good deal occupied in the evening with his
sister and her husband, whom he had not seen for some time. Colonel
Hampshire had also just heard that he was likely to be ordered to Egypt,
and when Lynton and he retired to the smoking-room, instead of going
there I went upstairs to my own room to finish a book in which I was
interested. I did not, however, sit up long, and very soon went to bed.

Before doing so, I drew back the curtains on the rods, partly because I
like plenty of air where I sleep, and partly also because I thought I
might like to see the play of the moonlight on the floor in the portion
of the gallery beyond where I lay, and where the blinds had not been
drawn.

I must have been asleep for some time, for the fire, which I had left in
full blaze, was gone to a few sparks wandering among the ashes, when I
suddenly awoke with the impression of having heard a latch click at the
further extremity of the gallery, where was the chamber containing books
and papers.

I had always been a light sleeper, but on the present occasion I woke at
once to complete and acute consciousness, and with a sense of stretched
attention which seemed to intensify all my faculties. The wind had
risen, and was blowing in fitful gusts round the house.

A minute or two passed, and I began almost to fancy I must have been
mistaken, when I distinctly heard the creak of the door, and then the
click of the latch falling back into place. Then I heard a sound on the
boards as of one moving in the gallery. I sat up to listen, and as I did
so I distinctly heard steps coming down the gallery.

[Illustration: “_Who are you?_”]

I heard them approach and pass my bed; I could see nothing, all was
dark; but I heard the tread proceeding toward where were the uncurtained
and unshuttered windows, two in number; but the moon shone through only
one of these, the nearest--the other was dark, shadowed by the chapel or
some other building at right angles. The tread seemed to me to pause now
and again, and then continue as before.

I now fixed my eyes intently on the one illumined window, and it
appeared to me as if some dark body passed across it; but what? I
listened intently, and heard the step proceed to the end of the gallery,
and then return.

I again watched the lighted window, and immediately that the sound
reached that portion of the long passage it ceased momentarily, and I
saw, as distinctly as I ever saw anything in my life, by moonlight, a
figure of a man with marked features, in what appeared to be a fur cap
drawn over the brows.

It stood in the embrasure of the window, and the outline of the face was
in silhouette; then it moved on, and as it moved I again heard the
tread.

I was as certain as I could be that the thing, whatever it was, or the
person, whoever he was, was approaching my bed.

I threw myself back in the bed, and as I did see a mass of charred wood
on the hearth fell down and sent up a flash of--I fancy sparks, that
gave out a glare into the darkness, and by that--red as blood--I saw a
face near me.

With a cry, over which I had as little control as the scream uttered by
a sleeper in the agony of a nightmare, I called, “Who are you?”

There was an instant during which my hair bristled on my head, as in the
horror of the darkness I prepared to grapple with the being at my side;
when a board creaked as if someone had moved, and I heard the footsteps
retreat, and again the click of the latch.

The next instant there was a rush on the stairs and Lynton burst into
the room, just as he had sprung out of bed, crying: “For God’s sake,
what is the matter? Are you ill?”

I could not answer. Lynton struck a light and leaned over the bed. Then
I seized him by the arm, and said, without moving: “There has been
something in this room--gone in thither.”

The words were hardly out of my mouth when Lynton, following the
direction of my eyes, had sprung to the end of the corridor and thrown
open the door there.

He went into the room beyond, looked round it, returned, and said: “You
must have been dreaming.”

By this time I was out of bed.

“Look for yourself,” said he, and he led me into the little room. It was
bare, with cupboards and boxes, a sort of lumber place. “There is
nothing beyond this,” said he, “no door, no staircase. It is a blind
way.” Then he added: “Now pull on your dressing-gown and come downstairs
to my sanctum.”

I followed him, and after he had spoken to Lady Lynton, who was standing
with the door of her room ajar in a state of great agitation, he turned
to me, and said: “No one can have been in your room. You see, my and my
wife’s apartments are close below, and no one could come up the spiral
staircase without passing my door. You must have had a nightmare.
Directly you screamed I rushed up the steps, and met no one descending;
and there is no place of concealment in the lumber-room at the end of
the gallery.”

Then he took me into his private snuggery, blew up the fire, lighted a
lamp, and said: “I shall be really grateful if you will say nothing
about this. There are some in the house and neighborhood who are silly
enough as it is. You stay here, and if you do not feel inclined to go to
bed, read--here are books. I must go to Lady Lynton, who is a good deal
frightened, and does not like to be left alone.”

He then went to his bedroom.

Sleep, as far as I was concerned, was out of the question, nor do I
think Sir Francis and his wife slept much, either.

I made up the fire, and after a time took up a book, and tried to read,
but it was useless.

I sat absorbed in thoughts and questionings till I heard the servants
stirring in the morning. I went to my own room, left the candle burning,
and got into bed. I had just fallen asleep when my servant brought me a
cup of tea at eight o’clock.

At breakfast Colonel Hampshire and his wife asked if anything had
happened in the night, as they had been much disturbed by noises
overhead, to which Lynton replied that I had not been very well, and had
an attack of cramp, and that he had been upstairs to look after me. From
his manner I could see that he wished me to be silent, and I said
nothing accordingly.

In the afternoon, when everyone had gone out, Sir Francis took me into
his snuggery, and said: “Halifax, I am very sorry about that matter last
night. It is quite true, what my brother said, that steps have been
heard about this house, but I never gave heed to such things, putting
all noises down to rats. But after your experiences I feel that it is
due to you to tell you something, and also to make to you an
explanation. There is--there was--no one in the room at the end of the
corridor, except the skeleton that was discovered in the chalk-pit when
you were here many years ago. I confess I had not paid much heed to it.
My archæological fancies passed; I had no visits from anthropologists;
the bones and skull were never shown to experts, but remain packed in a
chest in that lumber-room. I confess I ought to have buried them, having
no more scientific use for them, but I did not--on my word, I forgot all
about them, or, at least, gave no heed to them. However, what you have
gone through, and have described to me, has made me uneasy, and has also
given me a suspicion that I can account for that body in a manner that
had never occurred to me before.”

After a pause, he added: “What I am going to tell you is known to no one
else, and must not be mentioned by you--anyhow, in my lifetime. You know
now that, owing to the death of my father when quite young, I and my
brother and sister were brought up here with our grandfather, Sir
Richard. He was an old, imperious, hot-tempered man. I will tell you
what I have made out of a matter that was a mystery for long, and I will
tell you afterwards how I came to unravel it. My grandfather was in the
habit of going out at night with a young under-keeper, of whom he was
very fond, to look after the game and see if any poachers, whom he
regarded as his natural enemies, were about.

“One night, as I suppose, my grandfather had been out with the young man
in question, and, returning by the plantations, where the hill is
steepest, and not far from the chalk-pit you

[Illustration: “_He and the keeper buried the body._”]

remarked on yesterday, they came upon a man who, though not actually
belonging to the country, was well known in it as a sort of traveling
tinker of indifferent character and a notorious poacher. Mind this, I am
not sure it was at the place I mention; I only now surmise it. On the
particular night in question, my grandfather and the keeper must have
caught this man setting snares; there must have been a tussle, in the
course of which, as subsequent circumstances have led me to imagine, the
man showed fight, and was knocked down by one or the other of the
two--my grandfather or the keeper. I believe that after having made
various attempts to restore him, they found that the man was actually
dead.

“They were both in great alarm and concern--my grandfather especially.
He had been prominent in putting down some factory riots, and had given
orders to the military to fire, whereby several lives had been lost.
There was a vast outcry against him, and a certain political party had
denounced him as an assassin. No man was more vituperated; yet now, in
my conscience, I believe he acted with both discretion and pluck, and
arrested a mischievous movement that might have led to much bloodshed.
Be that as it may, my impression is that he lost his head over this
fatal affair with the tinker, and that he and the keeper together buried
the body secretly, not far from the place where he was killed. I now
think it was in the chalk-pit, and that the skeleton found years after
there belonged to this man.”

“Good heavens!” I exclaimed, as at once my mind rushed back to the
figure with the fur cap that I had seen against the window.

Sir Francis went on: “The sudden disappearance of the tramp, in view of
his well-known habits and wandering mode of life, did not for some time
excite surprise; but, later on, one or two circumstances having led to
suspicion, an inquiry was set on foot, and among others, my
grandfather’s keepers were examined before the magistrates. It was
remembered afterwards that the under-keeper in question was absent at
the time of the inquiry, my grandfather having sent him with some dogs
to a brother-in-law of his who lived upon the moors; but whether anyone
noticed the fact, or if they did, preferred to be silent, no
observations were made. Nothing came of the investigation, and the whole
subject would have been dropped if it had not been that two years later,
for some reasons I do not understand, but at the instigation of a
magistrate recently imported into the division, whom my grandfather
greatly disliked, and who was opposed to him in politics, a fresh
inquiry was instituted. In the course of that inquiry it transpired
that, owing to some unguarded words dropped by the under-keeper, a
warrant was about to be issued for his arrest. My grandfather, who had a
fit of the gout, was away from home at the time, but on hearing the news
he came home at once. The evening he returned he had a long interview
with the young man, who left the house after he had supped in the
servants’ hall. It was observed that he looked much depressed. The
warrant was issued the next day, but in the meantime the keeper had
disappeared. My grandfather gave orders to his people to do everything
in their power to assist the authorities in the search that was at once
set on foot, but was unable himself to take any share in it.

“No trace of the keeper was found, although at a subsequent period
rumors circulated that he had been heard of in America. But the man
having been unmarried, he gradually dropped out of remembrance, and as
my grandfather never allowed the subject to be mentioned in his
presence, I should probably never have known anything about it but for
the vague tradition which always attaches to such events, and for this
fact, that after my grandfather’s death, a letter came addressed to him
from somewhere in the United States from some one--the name different
from that of the keeper--but alluding to the past, and implying the
presence of a common secret, and, of course, with it came a request for
money. I replied, mentioning the death of Sir Richard, and asking for
an explanation. I did get an answer, and it is from that that I am able
to fill in so much of the story. But I never learned where the man had
been killed and buried, and my next letter to the fellow was returned
with ‘deceased’ written across it. Somehow, it never occurred to me till
I heard your story that possibly the skeleton in the chalk-pit might be
that of the poaching tinker. I will now most assuredly have it buried in
the churchyard.”

“That certainly ought to be done,” said I.

“And,” said Sir Francis, after a pause, “I give you my word--after the
burial of the bones, and you are gone, I will sleep for a week in the
bed in the gallery, and report to you if I see or hear anything. If all
be quiet, then--well, you form your own conclusions.”

I left a day after. Before long I got a letter from my friend, brief,
but to the point: “All quiet, old boy; come again.”




THE GHOST OF THE COUNT.


Not far from the Alameda, in the City of Mexico, there is a great old
stone building, in which once lived a very wealthy and wicked Spanish
count. The house has about four floors, and ninety rooms, more or less.
The entire fourth floor is rented and occupied by a big American firm,
and their bookkeeper, an American girl, has given us the following true
account of the ghost that for years haunted the building. The second
floor is unoccupied, as no one cares to live there for obvious reasons.
And the bottom floor is also unoccupied, save for lumber rooms, empty
boxes and crates and barrels. And last of all is the great patio with
its tiled floor, where secretly in the night a duel was fought to the
death by the wicked count and a famous Austrian prince, who was one of
Maximilian’s men. The count was killed.

No one knows why the duel was fought; some say it was because of a
beautiful Spanish woman; some say that it was because of treasure that
the two jointly “conveyed,” and which the count refused to divide with
his princely “socio,” and more people--Mexicans--shrug their shoulders
if you ask about it, and say, “Quien sabe?”

“I saw a ghost here last night, Miss James,” announces our cashier with
much eclat and evident pride.

So great is the shock that I gasp, and my pen drops, spattering red ink
on my nice fresh cuffs, and (worse luck!) on the ledger page that I had
just totted up. It is ruined, and I will have to erase it,
or--something! Wretched man!

“I wish to goodness it had taken you off,” I cry, wrathfully, as I look
at the bespattered work. “Now will you just look here and see what you
have done? I wish you and your ghosts were in----”

“Gehenna?” he inquires, sweetly; “I’ll fix that--it won’t take half a
minute. And don’t look so stern, else I won’t tell you about the
‘espanto.’ And you will be sorry if you don’t hear about it--it would
make such a good story.” (Insinuatingly.)

“Then go ahead with it.” (Ungraciously.)

“Well, last night I was waiting for West. He was to meet me here, after
which it was our intention to hit the--that is, I mean we were going out
together. (I nod scornfully.) And it seems that while I was patiently
waiting here, in my usual sweet-tempered way, the blank idiot had his
supper and then lay down to rest himself for a while. You know how
delicate he is? (Another contemptuous nod.) Unfortunately he forgot the
engagement, and slept on. He says he never awoke until three o’clock,
and so didn’t come, thinking I wouldn’t be there. Meantime I also went
to sleep, and might have snoozed on until three, likewise, but for the
fact that the ghost woke me----”

“Well? Do go on,” I urge.

“The ghost woke me, as I said,” proceeds the simpleton, slowly. “It was
passing its cold fingers over my face and groaning. Really, it was most
extraordinary. At first I didn’t know what it was; then, as I felt the
icy fingers stroking my face and heard blood-curdling groans issuing
from the darkness, I knew what it was. And I remembered the story of the
prince and his little duel down in the patio, and knew it was the ghost
of the prince’s victim. By the way, you don’t know what a funny
sensation it is to have a ghost pat your face, Miss James----”

“Pat nothing,” I retort, indignantly. “I wonder you are not ashamed to
tell me such fibs. Such a ta-ra-diddle! And as for the man that the
prince killed downstairs, you know as well as I do that he was taken
home to Spain and buried there. Why, then, should he come back here,
into our offices, and pat your face?”

“Ah, that I can’t say,” with a supercilious drawl. “I can only account
for it by thinking that the ghost has good taste--better than that of
some people I know,” meaningly. “But honestly, I swear that I am telling
you the truth--cross my heart and hope to die if I am not! And you
don’t know how brave I was--I never screamed; in fact, I never made a
sound; oh, I was brave!”

“Then what did you do?” sternly.

“I ran. Por Dios, how I ran! You remember with what alacrity we got down
the stairs during the November earthquake? (I remember only too
distinctly.) Well, last night’s run wasn’t a run, in comparison--it was
a disappearance, a flight, a sprint! I went down the four flights of
stairs like a streak of blue lightning, and the ghost flew with me. I
heard the pattering of its steps and its groans clean down to the patio
door, and I assure you I quite thought I had made such an impression
that it was actually going on home with me. And the thought made me feel
so weak that I felt perforce obliged to take a--have a--that is,
strengthen myself with a cocktail. After which I felt stronger and went
home quite peacefully. But it was an uncanny experience, wasn’t it?”

“Was it before or after taking that cocktail?” I ask, incredulously.
“And did you take one only or eleven?”

I am hard on the man, but he really deserves it. Ghosts! Spirits,
perhaps, but not ghosts. Whereat his feelings are quite “hurted”--so
much so that he vows he will never tell me anything again; I had better
read about Doubting Thomas; he never has seen such an unbelieving woman
in all his life, and if I were only a man he would be tempted to pray
that I might see the ghost; it would serve me right. Then, wrathfully
departs, to notice me no more that day.

Not believing the least bit in ghosts I gave the matter no more thought.
In fact, when you fall heir to a set of books that haven’t been posted
for nineteen days, and you have to do it all, and get up your trial
balance, too, or else give up your Christmas holidays, you haven’t much
time to think about ghosts, or anything else, except entries. And though
I had been working fourteen hours per day, the 24th of December, noon
hour, found me with a difference of $13.89. The which I, of course, must
locate and straighten out before departing next morning on my week’s
holiday. Por supuesto, it meant night work. Nothing else would do; and
besides, our plans had all been made to leave on the eight o’clock train
next morning. So I would just sit up all night, if need be, and find the
wretched balance and be done with it.

Behold me settled for work that night at seven o’clock in my own office,
with three lamps burning to keep it from looking dismal and lonely, and
books and ledgers and journals piled up two feet high around me. If hard
work would locate that nasty, hateful $13.89 it would surely be found. I
had told the portero downstairs on the ground floor to try and keep
awake for a time, but if I didn’t soon finish the work I would come down
and call him when I was ready to go home.

He lived in a little room, all shut off from the rest of the building,
so that it was rather difficult to get at him. Besides, he was the very
laziest and sleepiest peon possible, and though he was supposed to take
care of the big building at night, patrolling it so as to keep off
ladrones, he in reality slept so soundly that the last trumpet, much
less Mexican robbers, would not have roused him.

And for this very reason, before settling to my work I was careful to go
around and look to locks and bolts myself; everything was secure, and
the doors safely fastened. So that if ladrones did break through they
would have to be in shape to pass through keyholes or possess false
keys.

With never a thought of spirits or porteros, or anything else, beyond
the thirteen dollars and eighty-nine cents, I worked and added and
re-added and footed up. And at eleven o’clock, grazia a Dios, I had the
thirteen dollars all safe, and would have whooped for joy, had I the
time. However, I wasn’t out of the woods yet, the sum of eighty-nine
dollars being often more easy of location than eighty-nine cents. The
latter must be found, also, before I could have the pleasure of shouting
in celebration thereof.

At it I went again. After brain cudgeling and more adding and prayerful
thought I at last had under my thumb that abominable eighty cents.
Eureka! Only nine cents out. I could get it all straight and have some
sleep, after all! Inspired by which thought I smothered my yawns and
again began to add. I looked at my watch--ten minutes to twelve. Perhaps
I could get it fixed before one.

I suppose I had worked at the nine cents for about twenty minutes. One
of the cash entries looked to me to be in error. I compared it with the
voucher--yes, that was just where the trouble lay! Eleven
cents--ten--nine----

S-t-t! Out went the lights in the twinkling of an eye--as I sat, gaping
in my astonishment, from out of the pitchy darkness of the room came the
most dreary, horrible, blood-curdling groan imaginable. As I sat
paralyzed, not daring to breathe, doubting my senses for a moment, and
then thinking indignantly that it was some trick of that wretched
cashier, I felt long, thin, icy fingers passing gently over my face.
Malgame Dios! what a sensation! At first I was afraid to move. Then I
nervously tried to brush the icy, bony things away. As fast as I
brushed, with my heart beating like a steam-hammer, and gasping with
deadly fear, the fingers would come back again; a cold wind was blowing
over me. Again came that dreadful groan, and too frightened to move or
scream, I tumbled in a heap on the floor, among the books and ledgers.
Then I suppose I fainted.

When I regained my senses I was still in a heap with the ledgers; still
it was dark and still I felt the cold fingers caressing my face. At
which I became thoroughly desperate. No ghost should own me! I had
laughed at the poor cashier and hinted darkly at cocktails. Pray, what
better was I?

I scrambled to my feet, the fingers still stroking my face. I must
address them--what language--did they understand English or Spanish, I
wondered? Spanish would doubtless be most suitable, if indeed, it was
the ghost of the murdered count----.

“Will you do me the favor, Senor Ghost,” I started out bravely, in my
best Spanish, but with a very trembling voice, “to inform me what it is
that you desire? Is there anything I can do for you? Because, if not, I
would like very much to be allowed to finish my work, which I cannot do
(if you will pardon my abruptness) if I am not alone.”

(Being the ghost of a gentleman and a diplomat, surely he would take the
hint and vanish. Ojala!)

Perhaps the ghost did not understand my Spanish; at any rate there was
no articulate reply; there was another groan--again the fingers touched
me, and then there was such a mournful sigh that I felt sorry for the
poor thing--what could be the matter with it? With my pity, all fear was
lost for a moment, and I said to the darkness all about me:

“What is it that you wish, pobre senor? Can I not aid you? I am not
afraid--let me help you!”

The fingers moved uncertainly for a moment; then the ledgers all fell
down, with a loud bang; a cold hand caught mine, very gently--I tried
not to feel frightened, but it was difficult--and I was led off blindly,
through the offices. I could not see a thing--not a glimmer of light
showed; not a sound was heard except my own footsteps, and the faint
sound of the invisible something that was leading me along--there were
no more groans, thank goodness, else I should have shrieked and fainted,
without a doubt. Only the pattering footsteps and the cold hand that led
me on and on.

We--the fingers and I--were somehow in the great hall, then on the
second floor, and at last on the stairs, going on down, flight after
flight. Then I knew that I was being led about by the fingers on the
tiled floor of the patio, and close to the portero’s lodge. Simpleton
that he was! Sleeping like a log, no doubt, while I was being led about
in the black darkness by an invisible hand, and no one to save me! I
would have yelled, of course, but for one fact--I found it utterly
impossible to speak or move my tongue, being a rare and uncomfortable
sensation.

But where were we going? Back into the unused lumber rooms, joining onto
the patio? Nothing there, except barrels and slabs and empty boxes. What
could the ghost mean? He must be utterly demented, surely.

In the middle of the first room we paused. I had an idea of rushing out
and screaming for the portero, but abandoned it when I found that my
feet wouldn’t go. I heard steps passing to and fro about the floor, and
waited, cold and trembling. They approached me; again my hand was taken,
and I was led over near the corner of the room. Obedient to the unseen
will, I bent down and groped about the floor, guided by the cold fingers
holding mine, until I felt something like a tiny ring, set firmly in the
floor. I pulled at it faintly, but it did not move, at which the ghost
gave a faint sigh. For a second the cold fingers pressed mine, quite
affectionately, then released me, and I heard steps passing slowly into
the patio, then dying away. Where was it going, and what on earth did it
all mean?

But I was so tired and wrought up I tried to find the door, but couldn’t
(the cashier would have been revenged could he have seen me stupidly
fumbling at a barrel, thinking it was the door), and at last, too
fatigued and sleepy to stand, I dropped down on the cold stone floor
and went to sleep.

I must have slept for some hours, for when I awoke the light of dawn was
coming in at the window, and I sat up and wondered if I had taken leave
of my senses during the night. What on earth could I be doing here in
the lumber-room? Then, like a flash, I remembered, and, half
unconsciously, crept about on the floor seeking the small ring. There it
was! I caught it and jerked at it hard. Hey, presto, change! For it
seemed to me that the entire floor was giving way. There was a sliding,
crashing sound, and I found myself hanging on for dear life to a barrel
that, fortunately, retained its equilibrium, and with my feet dangling
into space. Down below me was a small, stone-floored room, with big
boxes and small ones ranged about the walls. Treasure! Like a flash the
thought struck me, and with one leap I was down in the secret room
gazing about at the boxes.

But, alas! upon investigation, the biggest chests proved empty. The bad,
wicked count! No wonder he couldn’t rest in his Spanish grave, but must
come back to the scene of his wickedness and deceit to make reparation!
But the smaller chests were literally crammed with all sorts of
things--big heavy Spanish coins, in gold and silver--gold and silver
dinner services, with the crest of the unfortunate emperor; magnificent
pieces of jeweled armor and weapons, beautiful jewelry and loose
precious stones. I deliberately selected handfuls of the latter, giving
my preference to the diamonds and pearls--I had always had a taste for
them, which I had never before been able to gratify!--and packed them in
a wooden box that I found in the lumber-room. The gold and dinner
services and armor, etc., I left as they were, being rather cumbersome,
and carried off, rejoicing, my big box of diamonds and pearls and other
jewelry.

Needless to say we didn’t go away for the holidays on the eight o’clock
train. But I did come down to the office and proceeded to locate my
missing nine cents. After which I unfolded the tale of the ghost and the
treasure--only keeping quiet the matter of my private loot. Of which I
was heartily glad afterwards. For when the government learned of the
find what do you suppose they offered me for going about with the ghost
and discovering the secret room and treasure? Ten thousand dollars! When
I refused, stating that I would take merely, as my reward, one of the
gold dinner services, the greedy things objected at first, but I finally
had my way. And to this very day they have no idea that I--even I--have
all the beautiful jewels. Wouldn’t they be furious if they knew it? But
they aren’t apt to, unless they learn English and read this story. Which
isn’t likely.




THE OLD MANSION.


Down on Long Beach, that narrow strip of sand which stretches along the
New Jersey coast from Barnegat Inlet on the north to Little Egg Harbor
Inlet on the south, the summer sojourner at some one of the numerous
resorts, which of late years have sprung up every few miles, may, in
wandering over the sand dunes just across the bay from the village of
Manahawkin, stumble over some charred timbers or vestiges of crumbling
chimneys, showing that once, years back, a human habitation has stood
there. If the find rouses the jaded curiosity of the visitor
sufficiently to impel him to question the weatherbeaten old bayman who
sails him on his fishing trips he will learn that these relics mark the
site of one of the first summer hotels erected on the New Jersey coast.

“That’s where the Old Mansion stood,” he will be informed by Captain
Nate or Captain Sam, or whatever particular captain it may chance to be,
and if by good fortune it chances to be Captain Jim, he will hear a
story that will pleasantly pass away the long wait for a sheepshead
bite.

It was my good luck to have secured Captain Jim for a preceptor in the
angler’s art during my vacation last summer, and his stories and
reminiscences of Long Beach were not the least enjoyable features of the
two weeks’ sojourn.

Captain Jim was not garrulous. Few of the baymen are. They are a sturdy,
self-reliant and self-controlled people, full of strong common sense,
but still with that firm belief in the supernatural which seems inherent
in dwellers by the sea.

“The Old Mansion,” said Captain Jim, “or the Mansion of Health, for that
was its full name, was built away back in 1822, so I’ve heard my father
say. There had been a tavern close by years before that was kept by a
man named Cranmer, and people used to come from Philadelphia by stage,
sixty miles through the pines, to ‘Hawkin, and then cross here by boat.
Some would stop at Cranmer’s and others went on down the beach to
Homer’s which was clear down at End by the Inlet. Finally some of the
wealthy people concluded that they wanted better accommodations than
Cranmer gave, so they formed the Great Swamp Long Beach Company, and
built the Mansion of Health. I’ve heard that when it was built it was
the biggest hotel on the coast, and was considered a wonder. It was 120
feet long, three stories high, and had a porch running all the way
around it, with a balcony on top. It was certainly a big thing for
those days. I’ve heard father tell many a time of the stage loads of gay
people that used to come rattling into ‘Hawkin, each stage drawn by four
horses, and sometimes four or five of them a day in the summer. A good
many people, too, used to come in their own carriages, and leave them
over on the mainland until they were ready to go home. There were gay
times at the Old Mansion then, and it made times good for the people
along shore, too.”

“How long did the Old Mansion flourish, Captain?” I asked.

“Well, for twenty-five or thirty years people came there summer after
summer. Then they built a railroad to Cape May, and that, with the
ghosts, settled the Mansion of Health.”

“What do you mean by the ghosts?” I demanded.

“Well, you see,” said Captain Jim, cutting off a mouthful of navy plug,
“the story got around that the old house was haunted. Some people said
there were queer things seen there, and strange noises were heard that
nobody could account for, and pretty soon the place got a bad name and
visitors were so few that it didn’t pay to keep it open any more.”

“But how did it get the name of being haunted, Captain Jim?” I
persisted.

“Why, it was this way,” continued the mariner. “Maybe you’ve heard of
the time early in the fifties when the Powhatan was wrecked on the beach
here, and every soul on board was lost. She was an emigrant ship, and
there were over 400 people aboard--passengers and crew. She came ashore
here during the equinoctial storm in September. There wasn’t any
life-saving stations in them days, and everyone was drowned. You can see
the long graves now over in the ‘Hawkin churchyard, where the bodies
were buried after they came ashore. They put them in three long trenches
that were dug from one end of the burying-ground to the other. The only
people on the beach that night was the man who took care of the old
mansion. He lived there with his family, and his son-in-law lived with
him. He was the wreckmaster for this part of the coast, too. It wasn’t
till the second day that the people from ‘Hawkin could get over to the
beach, and by that time the bodies had all come ashore, and the
wreckmaster had them all piled up on the sand. I was a youngster, then,
and came over with my father, and, I tell you, it was the awfullest
sight I ever saw--them long rows of drowned people, all lying there with
their white, still faces turned up to the sky. Some were women, with
their dead babies clasped tight in their arms, and some were husbands
and wives, whose bodies came ashore locked together in a death embrace.
I’ll never forget that sight as long as I live. Well, when the coroner
came and took charge he began to inquire whether any money or valuables
had been found, but the wreckmaster declared that not a solitary coin
had been washed ashore. People thought this was rather singular, as the
emigrants were, most of them, well-to-do Germans, and were known to have
brought a good deal of money with them, but it was concluded that it had
gone down with the ship. Well, the poor emigrants were given pauper
burial, and the people had begun to forget their suspicions until three
or four months later there came another storm, and the sea broke clear
over the beach, just below the Old Mansion, and washed away the sand.
Next morning early two men from ‘Hawkin sailed across the bay and landed
on the beach. They walked across on the hard bottom where the sea had
washed across, and, when about half way from the bay, one of the men saw
something curious close up against the stump of an old cedar tree. He
called the other man’s attention to it, and they went over to the stump.
What they found was a pile of leather money-belts that would have filled
a wheelbarrow. Every one was cut open and empty. They had been buried in
the sand close by the old stump, and the sea had washed away the
covering. The men didn’t go any further.

“They carried the belts to their boats and sailed back to ‘Hawkin as
fast as the wind would take them. Of course, it made a big sensation,
and everybody was satisfied that the wreckmaster had robbed the bodies,
if he hadn’t done anything worse, but there was no way to prove it, and
so nothing was done. The wreckmaster didn’t stay around here long after
that, though. The people made it too hot for him, and he and his family
went away South, where it was said he bought a big plantation and a lot
of slaves. Years afterward the story came to ‘Hawkin somehow that he was
killed in a barroom brawl, and that his son-in-law was drowned by his
boat upsettin’ while he was out fishin’. I don’t furnish any affidavits
with that part of the story, though.

“However, after that nobody lived in the Old Mansion for long at a time.
People would go there, stay a week or two, and leave--and at last it was
given up entirely to beach parties in the day time, and ghosts at
night.”

“But, Captain, you don’t really believe the ghost part, do you?” I
asked.

Captain Jim looked down the bay, expectorated gravely over the side of
the boat, and answered, slowly:

“Well, I don’t know as I would have believed in ’em if I hadn’t seen the
ghost.”

“What!” I exclaimed; “you saw it? Tell me about it. I’ve always wanted
to see a ghost, or next best thing, a man who has seen one.”

“It was one August, about 1861,” said the captain. “I was a young
feller then, and with a half dozen more was over on the beach cutting
salt hay. We didn’t go home at nights, but did our own cooking in the
Old Mansion kitchen, and at nights slept on piles of hay upstairs. We
were a reckless lot of scamps, and reckoned that no ghosts could scare
us. There was a big full moon that night, and it was as light as day.
The muskeeters was pretty bad, too, and it was easier to stay awake than
go to sleep. Along toward midnight me and two other fellers went out on
the old balcony, and began to race around the house. We hollered and
yelled, and chased each other for half an hour or so, and then we
concluded we had better go to sleep, so we started for the window of the
room where the rest were. This window was near one end on the ocean
side, and as I came around the corner I stopped as if I had been shot,
and my hair raised straight up on top of my head. Right there in front
of that window stood a woman looking out over the sea, and in her arms
she held a little child. I saw her as plain as I see you now. It seemed
to me like an hour she stood there, but I don’t suppose it was a second;
then she was gone. When I could move I looked around for the other boys,
and they were standing there paralyzed. They had seen the woman, too. We
didn’t say much, and we didn’t sleep much that night, and the next night
we bunked out on the beach. The rest of the crowd made all manner of
fun of us, but we had had all the ghost we wanted, and I never set foot
inside the old house after that.”

“When did it burn down, Captain?” I asked, as Jim relapsed into silence.

“Somewhere about twenty-five years ago. A beach party had been roasting
clams in the old oven, and in some way the fire got to the woodwork. It
was as dry as tinder, and I hope the ghosts were all burnt up with it.”




A MISFIT GHOST.


Every boy with a knowledge of adventurous literature, otherwise “novels
of action,” knows of the “phantom ship,” the spook of the high seas.

But it has not been known that ships themselves are haunted, and that in
the service of the United States Coast Survey there is a vessel now in
commission that is by her own officers supposed to be haunted.

Yet the Eagre, a 140-foot schooner of the coast survey, is looked upon
in the service as a very undesirable vessel to be aboard of. About her
there is an atmosphere of gloom that wardroom jest cannot dispel.

Duty on board her has been shunned as would be a pestilence, and stories
have been told by officers who have cruised aboard her that are not good
for timid people to hear. Officers have hesitated about telling these
uncanny stories, but they have become sufficiently well known to make a
billet to duty aboard the Eagre unwelcome among the coast survey men.

The Mohawk was launched June 10, 1875, at Greenpoint, and she was then
the largest sailing yacht afloat.

William T. Garner, her young millionaire owner, was very proud of his
new craft, and all the then leaders of New York society were invited to
participate in the good time afloat with which her launching was
celebrated. Commodore Garner, then but thirty-three years old, and his
young wife entertained charmingly, and the trim, speedy Mohawk was
christened with unusually merry festivities. Soon after that she was
capsized by a sudden squall off the landing at Stapleton, N. Y., and six
people were drowned like rats in her cabin and forecastle.

Then the Mohawk was raised at a cost of $25,000 and purchased by the
United States Government for the service of the coast survey. Her name
was changed to Eagre, for Jack Tar is proverbially superstitious, and
with the old name it would have been impossible to ship a crew.

Lieutenant Higby King describes his initial experience when he was
assigned to duty on the Eagre in this way:

“She had her full complement of officers minus one when I boarded her at
Newport to complete the list. Every cabin was occupied but the port
cabin by the companion way, and to that I was assigned.

“We had a jolly wardroom mess that night, and I retired from it early,
as I was tired by my journey to join the vessel. The others who were
still at the table regarded my retirement to the port cabin in absolute
silence, having bidden me good-night. Their silence did not lead me to
suspect anything, though I knew that the Eagre had once been the Mohawk.
My cabin door had the usual cabin lock of brass, and the porthole was
also securely fastened. There could have been no one under the bed or
sofa, as beneath each was a facing of solid oak paneling.

“I undressed lazily and left the light burning dimly in my bracket lamp.
I tried conscientiously to go to sleep for I don’t know how long with my
back turned to the light. The noise ceased in the wardroom after a time,
and I knew the others had turned in, but I felt unaccountably nervous
and restless. I turned over and faced the light, thoroughly wide awake,
and there in the single chair sat an elderly man, seemingly wrapt in
deep thought. He was dressed in a blue yachting reefer, and had a long,
gray beard. His hands were clasped in his lap, and his eyes were
downcast. His face was not pale and ghastly, as the faces of ghosts are
popularly supposed to be, but ruddy and weatherbeaten.

“I regarded him in scared silence for I don’t know how long, though it
seemed an hour when he, or it, or whatever it was, disappeared. During
that time the ghost, and such I now believe it to have been, made not a
motion, nor did it say anything. Presently I looked again, and it was
gone.

“At breakfast the others watched me critically as I took my seat. I had
not intended to say anything about my experience, for I thought then I
had seen some sort of hallucination and strongly suspected that I was
verging on insanity. Lieutenant Irving asked me if I had slept well. I
replied that I had. ‘Didn’t you see anything?’ he inquired. I then
frankly admitted that I had and described my experience. Then I learned
that each one of the seven others present had tried the port cabin at
one time or another, and each had seen the self-same apparition. It had
acted in exactly the same way in each case, except in the case of
Irving, who shot at it with his pistol, when it immediately disappeared.
Some of the others had been led by their curiosity to inquire if anyone
lost on the Mohawk resembled the figure, and found that none of the
unfortunate ones at all fitted the description. It had been dubbed by
them the ‘misfit ghost.’ That one experience was enough for me, and
after that I, by courtesy, shared the cabin of another fellow.”

Lieutenant Irving and others corroborate the story of Lieutenant King,
and as additional evidence that the Eagre is haunted, Lieutenant Irving
describes a New Year’s eve experience of the Eagre’s officers, that is,
to say the least, novel in the way of supernatural manifestations.

“It was at mess. The first toast, ‘Sweethearts and Wives,’ had been
drunk, as it always is by Yankee sailors the world over on occasions of
festivity. Everyone was feeling happy, or, as Thackeray has it,
‘pleasant,’ when suddenly the sliding-doors separating the wardroom from
the companion way closed slowly with a loud, squeaking noise. They had
seldom been closed, and it took the entire strength of a man to start
them from their rusty fastenings. Yet upon this occasion they started
easily and closed tightly, while the officers jumped to their feet in
breathless astonishment. Half a dozen men hauled them open in haste, but
not a soul was behind them or anywhere about. ‘It must be our old friend
of the port cabin,’ suggested one, and in awe-stricken silence the
health of the ‘misfit ghost’ was drunk.”




AN UNBIDDEN GUEST.


My cousins, Kate and Tom Howard, married at Trinity, at Easter time,
concluded to commence housekeeping by taking one of those delightfully
expensively furnished, unfurnished cottages, with which the fashionable
watering place of W---- abounds, from whose rear windows one might
almost take a plunge into the surf, the beach beginning at the back
door. They went down quite early in May, being in a great hurry to try
their domestic experiment; and, as the evenings were still cold, they
spent them about the open fire, “spooning.”

It was upon one of those nights, about eleven o’clock, that they were
startled by a noise, as of some small object falling, soon followed by
the sound of heavy footsteps, and then quiet again reigned supreme. At
once Tom, poker in hand, boldly started in search of the burglar,
followed by Kate, wildly clutching at his coat-tail, and in a state of
tremor. They looked upstairs, under the various beds, Kate suggesting
that in novels they were always to be found there.

The dining-room was next explored, where all seemed well, and, lastly
the kitchen, where they found what was evidently a solution of the
mystery. The burglar had entered by the back door, which was found to be
unlocked and slightly ajar. The first excitement subsiding, they
returned again to the dining-room, where Tom, upon closer inspection,
then discovered that one of a pair of quaint little pepper-pots, wedding
gifts, was missing, and other small articles on the sideboard had been
slightly disturbed.

The next morning, when Kate mildly remonstrated with the queen of the
kitchen for her carelessness, she received a shock by being told that it
was her usual custom to leave the door open, “so that it would be aisy,
convanient loike for the milkmaid.” They parted with her, and a new maid
was engaged, whose chief qualification for the place was that she was
most faithful in the discharge of her duties, especially in “locking
up.”

While they mourned the loss of the pepper-pot, still it seemed so
trifling when they thought of that lovely repousse salad bowl, sent by
Aunt Julia, which stood near by, that nothing was said of the loss
outside of the family, and the little household settled into its normal
state once more of “billing and cooing.”

About a fortnight later, Tom started out one night with an old
fisherman, one of the natives, and a local “character,” to indulge in
that delightful pastime, so dear to the heart of man, known as
“eeling,” and, as the night was dark, the eels were particularly
“sporty,” so that it was well on towards the “wee sma’ hours” when Tom
at last returned to the cottage.

He found all excitement within. Kate was in hysterics, and the new maid,
also weeping, was industriously applying the camphor bottle to her
mistress’ nose. The burglar, or ghost, as they had now decided, the
windows and doors being found to be securely locked this time, had been
abroad again, but had succeeded in purloining nothing. His royal
ghostship had amused himself, apparently, by simply walking about.

“Oh, Tom! he had on such heavy boots and was so dreadfully bold about
it,” said Kate, tearfully.

From that time Kate became nervous and refused to be left alone. Tom
started whenever a door creaked, and the “treasure” departed hurriedly,
saying, “Faith, the house is haunted, sure.”

After that Kate spent her days in “girl hunting,” and her nights in
answering shadowy advertisements that never materialized. They tried
Irish, English, Dutch, and a “heathen Chinee,” with a sprinkling of
“colored ladies” to vary the monotony. They seemed about to become
famous throughout the length and breadth of the land as “the family
that changes help once a week,” when they landed Treasure No. 2.

Shortly after her advent we were all asked down to W----, to help
celebrate their happiness, and incidentally to christen the new dinner
set. We were not a little surprised at finding Kate so pale and Tom
rather distrait. However, after a delightful dinner, that should have
filled with pleasure the most exacting bride, we adjourned to the
piazza, leaving the men to the contemplation of their cigars. We were
enthusiastic in our praise of the house, and congratulated Kate in
securing such a prize, when, to our horror, she burst into tears, and
said: “Oh, girls, it’s a dreadful place; it’s haunted!” and then
tearfully proceeded with the details, until we all felt creepy and
suggested the parlor and lights.

It was not until long afterwards that Kate discovered that Tom had also
related the “ghost story” to the men, that evening, to which Ned Harris
had said, laconically, “Rats,” and Bob Shaw laughingly remarked, “Tom,
old chap, you really shouldn’t take your nightcap so strong.”

About the first of July the climax came. The ghost walked again, this
time taking not only the remaining pepper-pot, but also a silver
salt-cellar. Evidently he had a penchant for small articles, but unlike
former times, everything on the sideboard was in the greatest disorder.
Aunt Julia’s salad bowl was found on the floor, and not far away the
cheese-dish, with its contents scattered about. This time one of the
windows was found half open. A week later a note came to me from Kate,
saying that she and Tom had gone to Saratoga to spend the remainder of
the season with her mother.

The following spring Tom received a note and parcel from Mr. B----, the
owner of the house at W----, which read as follows:

     DEAR MR. HOWARD: I send you by express three articles of silver,
     which my wife suggests may belong to you, as they are marked with
     your initials, namely, two silver pepper-pots and a salt-cellar;
     they were found, the other day, during the process of spring house
     cleaning, in a rat hole, behind the sideboard. I forgot to have the
     holes stopped up last spring, or to caution you against the water
     rats; the great fellows will get in, you know. Kind regards to Mrs.
     Howard.

Very truly,

JOHN B----.




The next season the “Ghost Club” was organized, the badge being a small
silver rat, bearing proudly aloft a tiny pepper-pot. We thoughtfully
offered Tom the presidency, but he declined, with offended dignity, from
the effects of which I think he will never fully recover.




THE DEAD WOMAN’S PHOTOGRAPH.


Virgil Hoyt is a photographer’s assistant up at St. Paul, and a man of a
good deal of taste. He has been in search of the picturesque all over
the West, and hundreds of miles to the north in Canada, and can speak
three or four Indian dialects, and put a canoe through the rapids. That
is to say, he is a man of an adventurous sort and no dreamer. He can
fight well and shoot well and swim well enough to put up a winning race
with the Indian boys, and he can sit all day in the saddle and not dream
about it at night.

Wherever he goes he uses his camera.

“The world,” Hoyt is in the habit of saying to those who sit with him
when he smokes his pipe, “was created in six days to be photographed.
Man--and especially woman--was made for the same purpose. Clouds are not
made to give moisture, nor trees to cast shade. They were created for
the photographer.”

In short, Virgil Hoyt’s view of the world is whimsical, and he doesn’t
like to be bothered with anything disagreeable. That is the reason that
he loathes and detests going to a house of mourning to photograph a
corpse. The horribly bad taste of it offends him partly, and partly he
is annoyed at having to shoulder, even for a few moments, a part of
someone’s burden of sorrow. He doesn’t like sorrow, and would willingly
canoe 500 miles up the cold Canadian rivers to get rid of it.
Nevertheless, as assistant photographer, it is often his duty to do this
very kind of thing.

Not long ago he was sent for by a rich Jewish family at St. Paul to
photograph the mother, who had just died. He was very much put out, but
he went. He was taken to the front parlor, where the dead woman lay in
her coffin. It was evident that there was some excitement in the
household and that a discussion was going on, but Hoyt wasn’t concerned,
and so he paid no attention to the matter.

The daughter wanted the coffin turned on end, in order that the corpse
might face the camera properly, but Hoyt said he could overcome the
recumbent attitude and make it appear that the face was taken in the
position it would naturally hold in life, and so they went out and left
him alone with the dead.

The face was a strong and positive one, such as may often be seen among
Jewish matrons. Hoyt regarded it with some admiration, thinking to
himself that she was a woman who had been used to having her own way.
There was a strand of hair out of place, and he pushed it back from her
brow. A bud lifted its head too high from among the roses on her breast
and spoiled the contour of the chin, so he broke it off. He remembered
these things later very distinctly and that his hand touched her bare
face two or three times.

Then he took the photographs and left the house.

He was very busy at the time and several days elapsed before he was able
to develop the plates. He took them from the bath, in which they had
lain with a number of others, and went to work upon them. There were
three plates, he having taken that number merely as a precaution against
any accident. They came up well, but as they developed he became aware
of the existence of something in the photograph which had not been
apparent to his eye. The mysterious always came under the head of the
disagreeable with him, and was therefore to be banished, so he made only
a few prints and put the things away out of sight. He hoped that
something would intervene to save him from attempting an explanation.

But it is a part of the general perplexity of life that things do not
intervene as they ought and when they ought, so one day his employer
asked him what had become of those photographs. He

[Illustration: “_They left him alone with the dead._”]

tried to evade him, but it was futile, and he got out the finished
photographs and showed them to him. The older man sat staring at them a
long time.

“Hoyt,” said he, at length, “you’re a young man, and I suppose you have
never seen anything like this before. But I have. Not exactly the same
thing, but similar phenomena have come my way a number of times since I
went into the business, and I want to tell you there are things in
heaven and earth not dreamt of----”

“Oh, I know all that tommy-rot,” cried Hoyt, angrily, “but when anything
happens I want to know the reason why, and how it is done.”

“All right,” said his employer, “then you might explain why and how the
sun rises.”

But he humored the younger man sufficiently to examine with him the bath
in which the plates were submerged and the plates themselves. All was as
it should be. But the mystery was there and could not be done away with.

Hoyt hoped against hope that the friends of the dead woman would somehow
forget about the photographs, but of course the wish was unreasonable,
and one day the daughter appeared and asked to see the photographs of
her mother.

“Well, to tell the truth,” stammered Hoyt, “those didn’t come out as
well as we could wish.”

“But let me see them,” persisted the lady. “I’d like to look at them,
anyway.”

[Illustration: “_He showed her the prints._”]

“Well, now,” said Hoyt, trying to be soothing, as he believed it was
always best to be with women--to tell the truth, he was an ignoramus
where women were concerned--“I think it would be better if you didn’t
see them. There are reasons why----” he ambled on like this, stupid man
that he was, and of course the Jewess said she would see those pictures
without any further delay.

So poor Hoyt brought them out and placed them in her hand, and then ran
for the water pitcher, and had to be at the bother of bathing her
forehead to keep her from fainting.

For what the lady saw was this: Over face and flowers and the head of
the coffin fell a thick veil, the edges of which touched the floor in
some places. It covered the features so well that not a hint of them was
visible.

“There was nothing over mother’s face,” cried the lady at length.

“Not a thing,” acquiesced Hoyt. “I know, because I had occasion to touch
her face just before I took the picture. I put some of her hair back
from her brow.”

“What does it mean, then?” asked the lady.

“You know better than I. There is no explanation in science. Perhaps
there is some in psychology.”

“Well,” said the lady, stammering a little and coloring, “mother was a
good woman, but she always wanted her own way, and she always had it,
too.”

“Yes?”

“And she never would have her picture taken. She didn’t admire herself.
She said no one should ever see a picture of hers.”

“So?” said Hoyt, meditatively. “Well, she’s kept her word, hasn’t she?”

The two stood looking at the pictures for a time. Then Hoyt pointed to
the open blaze in the grate.

“Throw them in,” he commanded. “Don’t let your father see them--don’t
keep them yourself. They wouldn’t be good things to keep.”

“That’s true enough,” said the lady, slowly. And she threw them in the
fire. Then Virgil Hoyt brought out the plates and broke them before her
eyes.

And that was the end of it--except that Hoyt sometimes tells the story
to those who sit beside him when his pipe is lighted.




THE GHOST OF A LIVE MAN.


We were in the South Atlantic Ocean, in the latitude of the island of
Fernando Norohna, about 40 degrees 12 minutes south, on board the barque
H. G. Johnson, homeward bound from Australia. I was the only passenger,
and we had safely rounded Cape Horn, with the barometer at 28 degrees 18
minutes, and yet had somehow miraculously escaped any extremely heavy
gale--had had light northerly and easterly winds till we reached 20
degrees, and thence the southeast trades were sending us fast on our way
to the equator. I sat on deck smoking my pipe, with a glorious full moon
shedding its bright pathway across the blue waters, and chatting with
the first mate, a man some fifty-eight years of age, who had followed
the sea since he was a boy. For twenty years or more he had been mate or
captain, and many and varied were the experiences he could relate. A
thorough sailor and skillful navigator, he was as honest as the day is
long--had a heart as big as an ox and was an all-round good fellow and
genial companion. Some of his yarns might be taken cum grano salis, yet
he always positively assured me that he “was telling me the truth.” An
account of a voyage that he made in a whaler from the Southern Ocean to
New Bedford seemed to me worthy to be repeated. He had rounded Cape Horn
six times and the Cape of Good Hope twenty-six times, besides making
many trips across the Western Ocean and to South American ports. I give
his account as near as possible in his own words:

“It was in ’71 that I commanded the whaler Mary Jane. We had been out
from home over three years, and had on board a full cargo of whale oil,
besides 2,000 pounds of whalebone, which was then worth $5 per pound. I
also had been fortunate enough to find in a dead whale which we came
across a large quantity of ambergris, and our hearts were all very light
as we began our homeward voyage, and our thoughts all tended to the
hearty welcome which we should receive from wives and sweethearts when
we reached our journey’s end. Many a night as I lay in my berth I had
thought with great pleasure of the amount of money that would be coming
to me from the proceeds of our voyage when we arrived in New Bedford.

“I calculated that I had made $12,000 as my share of the proceeds of the
whalebone and oil--to say nothing of the ambergris, which I well knew
would bring at least $20,000, and one-half of which belonged to me. You
can therefore imagine that I was well pleased with myself as we went
bounding along through the southeast trades. We crossed the equator in
longitude 36 and soon after took strong northeast trades, and all was
going as well as I could wish. We had put the ship in perfect order,
painted her inside and out, and you would never have recognized her as
the old whaling ship that had for three years been plying the Southern
Ocean for whales. Never shall I forget an old bull whale that we tackled
about two degrees to the south of Cape Horn--but that is another story,
which I will give you another time.

“We had just lost the northeast trades and were entering the Gulf
Stream. I sat in my cabin with my chart on the table before me rolled
up. I had just picked our location on it, and was thinking that in a
week more I should be at home, surrounded by those near and dear to me,
and relating to them the story of my great good fortune.

“It was always my custom to work up my latitude and longitude about four
o’clock in the afternoon, and then after supper pick off her position on
the chart, have a smoke and perhaps just before retiring a nip of grog,
and then at 8.30 o’clock, as regular as a clock, I would turn in.

“I am a great smoker, and this day I had been smoking all the afternoon,
besides having had two or three nips. We had a dog on board whom we
called ‘Bosun,’ who had been out with us all the voyage, and who was
afraid of nothing. He had endeared himself to every man on board, and
when Bosun ‘took water’ something very serious was in the wind. This
night as I sat in the cabin I heard a most dismal howl from Bosun, and
called out to the mate to know what was the matter with the dog. He
replied that he ‘reckoned some of the men had been teasing him,’ and the
occurrence soon passed from my mind.

“Suddenly I saw someone coming down the after companion way into the
cabin. I supposed at first it was the mate and wondered that he had not
first spoken to me, but then I noticed that he wore clothes I had never
seen on the mate, and as he advanced into the cabin I saw his face. It
was the face of a man I had never seen in my life. He was thin and pale
and haggard, and as he advanced he looked about the cabin and at the
rolled up chart on the table. There seemed to be an appeal in his eyes,
and then there swept over his face a look of intense disappointment, and
before I could move or speak, he had vanished from my sight.

“Now I am a very practical man, and I at once straightened myself in my
chair and said to myself: ‘Well, old man, you have smoked one too many
pipes to-day, or else you have had one drink too much, for you have been
asleep in your chair and seen a ghost.’ I was quite satisfied that I
had had a dream, especially as I called to the mate and asked him if he
had seen anyone come below. He said no; that he had not left the deck
for the last hour, and the man at the wheel, directly in front of the
door, was sure no one had entered the cabin, so I convinced myself that
I had had a very vivid dream--though I could not help thinking of the
matter all through the next day.

“At eight o’clock the next evening I sat in the same place with my work
just finished and the chart lying rolled up on the table before me, when
suddenly the dog’s dismal howl rang through the ship, and looking up I
saw those same legs coming down the after companion. My hair fairly
stood on end, and yet to-day surely I was wide awake. I had only smoked
one pipe all day, and had not touched a drop of liquor. The same wan,
emaciated figure walked into the cabin, glanced inquiringly and
appealingly at me, and again there spread over his face that look of
utter disappointment as if he had sought something and failed to find
it, and again he disappeared. I rushed on deck to the mate and told him
all I had seen during the last two nights; but he made light of it, and
assured me I had been asleep or smoking too much. He did not like to
suggest that I had been drinking. Still, I could see that the thought
that came into his mind was ‘The old man has seen ’em again.’ I gave up
trying to convince him, but requested that the next night, from 8 to
8.30, he should sit with me in the cabin.

“How the next day passed I cannot tell. I only know that my thoughts
never left that ghostly visitant, and somehow I felt that the evening
would reveal something to me and the spell be broken. I made up my mind
I would speak to the thing, whatever it was, and I felt a sort of
security in the presence of the mate, who was a daring fellow and feared
neither man nor the devil. Neither rum nor tobacco passed my lips during
the next day, and eight o’clock found the mate and I sitting in the
cabin, and this time the chart lay open on the table beside us. Just as
eight bells struck the dog’s premonitory wail sounded, and looking up we
both saw the figure descending the cabin stairs. We both seemed frozen
to our seats, and the strange weirdness of the whole proceeding cast the
same spell over the mate and me alike, and we were both unable to move
or speak. Slowly the figure proceeded into the cabin and glanced around
without a word, but with the same expectant look on his face. His form
was even more wasted, his cheeks sunken and his eyes seemed almost out
of sight so deeply were they set in their sockets. As his eye fell on
the open chart a look of supreme joy fairly irradiated his features, and
advancing to the table he placed one long, bony finger on the chart,
held it for a moment and then again disappeared from our sight.

“For five minutes after he had left us we sat speechless. Then I managed
to say: ‘What do you think of that, Mr. Morris?’ ‘My God! sir, I don’t
know--it’s beyond me.’ Then my eyes fell on the open chart and there
where the finger had been was a tiny spot of blood, exactly on the point
of longitude 63 degrees west and latitude 37 degrees north. We were then
only about fifty miles distant from that position, and immediately there
came to me the determination to steer the ship there; so I laid her
course accordingly, and posted a lookout in the crow’s nest. At five
o’clock in the morning, just as the east began to grow gray, the lookout
called out: ‘Boat on the lee bow,’ and as we came up to it we found four
men in it--three dead and one with just a remnant of life left in him.
We sewed the three bodies in canvas and buried them in the ocean, and
then gave all our attention to restoring life to the poor emaciated
frame, which, I then recognized, was the very man who for three
successive nights had visited me in my cabin.

“By judicious and careful nursing life gradually came back to him, and
in four days’ time he was able to sit up and talk with me in the cabin.
It seems he commanded the ship Promise, and she had taken fire and been
destroyed, and all hands had to take to the boats. Ten were in the boats
at first, but their food had given out, and one by one he had seen them
die, and one by one he had cast the bodies overboard. Finally he lost
consciousness and knew not whether his three remaining companions were
dead or alive.

“Then he said he seemed in a dream to see a ship and tried to go to her
for help, but just as he would be going on board of her something would
seem to keep him back; three times in his dreams he tried to visit this
ship, and the last time there seemed to come to him a certain
satisfaction, and he felt that he had succeeded in his object. Turning
to my table, he said: ‘Let me take your chart; I’ll show you just where
we were.’

“‘Stop,’ said I, ‘don’t take that chart, it is an old one and all marked
over. Mark your position on this new one.’ He took my pencil and knife,
and carefully sharpened his pencil. Then, taking my dividers, he
measured his latitude and longitude and placed a pencil dot at a point
on the clean chart. As he lifted his hand he said: ‘Oh, excuse me,
captain, I cut my finger in sharpening the pencil and have left a drop
of blood on the chart.’

“‘Never mind,’ said I, ‘leave it there.’ And then I produced the old
chart and there, in an exactly corresponding place was the drop of blood
left by my ghostly visitor.”

Then looking steadily into my face the mate solemnly added: “I can’t
explain this, sir, perhaps you can; but I can tell you on my honor it is
God’s own truth that I have told you.”




THE GHOST OF WASHINGTON.


It was early on Christmas morning when John Reilly wheeled away from a
picturesque little village where he had passed the previous night, to
continue his cycling tour through eastern Pennsylvania. To-day his
intention was to stop at Valley Forge, and then to ride on up the
Schuylkill Valley, visiting in turn the many points of historical
interest that lay along his route. Valley Forge, his road map indicated,
was but a short distance further on. All around him were the hills and
fields and roads over which Washington and his half-starved army had
foraged and roamed throughout the trying winter of 1777-8--one hundred
and twenty-six years ago.

It was a beautiful Christmas day, truly, and, as he wheeled along, young
Reilly’s thoughts were almost equally divided between the surrounding
pleasant scenery and the folks at home, who, he knew very well, were
assembling at just about the present time around a heavily laden
Christmas tree in the front parlor. The sun rose higher and higher and
Reilly pedaled on down the valley, passing every now and then quaint,
pleasant-looking farmhouses, many of which, no doubt, had been built
anterior to the period which had given the vicinity its history.

Arriving, finally, at a place where the road forked off in two
directions, Reilly was puzzled which way to go on. There happened to be
a dwelling close by. Accordingly he dismounted, left his wheel leaning
against a gate-post at the side of the road, and walked up a wretchedly
flagged walk leading to the house, with the idea of getting instructions
from its inmates.

Situated in the center of an unkempt field of rank grass and weeds, the
building lay back from the highway probably one hundred and fifty feet.
It was long and low in shape, containing but one story and having what
is termed a gabled roof, under which there must have been an attic of no
mean size. On coming close to the house, a fact Reilly had not noticed
from the road became plainly evident. It was deserted. He saw that the
roof and side shingles were in wretched condition; that the window
sashes and frames as well as the doors and door frames were missing from
the openings in the side walls where once they had been, and that the
entire side of the house, including that part of the stone foundation
which showed above the ground, was full of cracks and seams. At first on
the point of turning back, he concluded to see what the interior was
like anyway.

Accordingly he went inside. Glancing around the large dust-filled room
he had entered his gaze at first failed to locate any object of the
least interest. A rickety appearing set of steps went up into the attic
from one side of the apartment and over in one corner was a large open
fireplace, from the walls of which much of the brickwork had become
loosened and fallen out. Reilly had started up the steps toward the
attic, when happening to look back for an instant, his attention was
attracted to a singular-looking, jug-shaped bottle no larger than a
vinegar cruet, which lay upon its side on the hearth of the fireplace,
partly covered up by debris of loose bricks and mortar. He hastened back
down the steps and crossed the room, taking the bottle up in his hand
and examining it with curiosity. Being partly filled with a liquid of
some kind or other the bottle was very soon uncorked and held under the
young man’s nose. The liquid gave forth a peculiar, pungent and inviting
odor. Without further hesitation Reilly’s lips sought the neck of the
bottle. It is hardly possible to describe the pleasure and satisfaction
his senses experienced as he drank.

While the fluid was still gurgling down his throat a heavy hand was
placed most suddenly on his shoulder and his body was given a violent
shaking. The bottle fell to the floor and was broken into a hundred
pieces.

“Hello!” said a rough voice almost in Reilly’s ear. “Who are you,
anyway? And what are you doing within the lines? A spy, I’ll be bound.”

As most assuredly there had been no one else in the vicinity of the
building when he had entered it and with equal certainty no one had come
down the steps from the attic, Reilly was naturally surprised and
mystified by this unexpected assault. He struggled instinctively to
break loose from the unfriendly grasp, and when he finally succeeded he
twisted his body around so that he faced across the room. Immediately he
made the remarkable discovery that there were four other persons in the
apartment--three uncouth-looking fellows habited in fantastic but ragged
garments, and a matronly-looking woman, the latter standing over a
washtub which had been elevated upon two chairs in a corner near the
fireplace. To all appearance the woman had been busy at her work and had
stopped for the moment to see what the men were going to do; her waist
sleeves were rolled up to the shoulders and her arms dripped with water
and soapsuds. Over the tops of the tubs, partly filled with water, there
were visible the edges of several well-soaked fabrics. Too add to his
astonishment he noticed that in the chimney-place, which a moment before
was falling apart, but now seemed to be clean and in good condition, a
cheerful fire burned, and that above the flames was suspended an iron
pot, from which issued a jet of steam. He noticed also that the entire
appearance of the room had undergone a great change. Everything seemed
to be in good repair, tidy and neat; the ceilings, the walls and the
door; even the stairway leading to the attic. The openings in the walls
were fitted with window sashes and well-painted doors. The apartment
had, in fact, evolved under his very eyesight from a state of absolute
ruin into one of excellent preservation.

All of this seemed so weird and uncanny, that Reilly stood for a moment
or two in the transformed apartment, utterly dumbfounded, with his mouth
wide open and his eyes all but popping out of his head. He was brought
to his senses by the fellow who had shaken him growling out:

“Come! Explain yourself!”

“An explanation is due me,” Reilly managed to gasp.

“Don’t bandy words with the rascal, Harry,” one of the other men spoke
up. “Bring him along to headquarters.”

Thereupon, without further parley, the three men marched Reilly in
military fashion into the open air and down to the road. Here he picked
up at the gate-post his bicycle, while they unstacked a group of three
old-fashioned-looking muskets located close by. When the young man had
entered the house a few minutes before, this stack of arms had not been
there. He could not understand it. Neither could he understand, on
looking back at the building as he was marched off down the road, the
mysterious agency that had transformed its dilapidated exterior, just as
had been the interior, into a practically new condition.

While they trudged along, the strangers exhibited a singular interest in
the wheel Reilly pushed at his side, running their coarse hands over the
frame and handle-bar, and acting on the whole as though they never
before had seen a bicycle. This in itself was another surprise. He had
hardly supposed there were three men in the country so totally
unacquainted with what is a most familiar piece of mechanism everywhere.

At the same time that they were paying so much attention to the wheel,
Reilly in turn was studying with great curiosity his singular-looking
captors. Rough, unprepossessing appearing fellows they were, large of
frame and unshaven, and, it must be added, dirty of face. What remained
of their very ragged clothing, he had already noticed, was of a most
remarkable cut and design, resembling closely the garments worn by the
Continental militiamen in the War of Independence. The hats were broad,
low of crown, and three-cornered in shape; the trousers were
buff-colored and ended at the knees, and the long, blue spike-tailed
coats were flapped over at the extremities of the tails, the flaps being
fastened down with good-sized brass buttons. Leather leggings were
strapped around cowhide boots, through the badly worn feet of which, in
places where the leather had cracked open, the flesh, unprotected by
stockings, could be seen. Dressed as he was, in a cleanly, gray cycling
costume, Reilly’s appearance, most assuredly, was strongly in contrast
to that of his companions.

After a brisk walk of twenty minutes, during which they occasionally met
and passed by one or two or perhaps a group of men clothed and outfitted
like Reilly’s escorts, the little party followed the road up a slight
incline and around a well-wooded bend to the left, coming quite
suddenly, and to the captive, very unexpectedly, to what was without
doubt a military encampment; a village, in fact, composed of many rows
of small log huts. Along the streets, between the buildings, muskets
were stacked in hundreds of places. Over in one corner, on a slight
eminence commanding the road up which they had come, and cleverly hidden
from it behind trees and shrubbery, the young man noticed a battery of
field pieces. Wherever the eye was turned on this singular scene were
countless numbers of soldiers all garmented in three-cornered hats,
spike-tailed coats and knee breeches, walking lazily hither and thither,
grouped around crackling fires, or parading up and down the streets in
platoons under the guidance of ragged but stern-looking officers.

Harry stopped the little procession of four in front of one of the
larger of the log houses. Then, while they stood there, the long blast
from a bugle was heard, followed by the roll of drums. A minute or two
afterward, several companies of militia marched up and grounded their
arms, forming three sides of a hollow square around them, the fourth
and open side being toward the log house. Directly succeeding this
maneuver there came through the doorway of the house and stepped up the
center of the square, stopping directly in front of Reilly, a
dignified-looking person, tall and straight and splendidly proportioned
of figure, and having a face of great nobility and character.

The cold chills chased one another down Reilly’s back. His limbs swayed
and tottered beneath his weight. He had never experienced another such
sensation of mingled astonishment and fright.

He was in the presence of General Washington. Not a phantom Washington,
either, but Washington in the flesh and blood; as material and earthly a
being as ever crossed a person’s line of vision. Reilly, in his time,
had seen so many portraits, marble busts and statues of the great
commander that he could not be mistaken. Recovering the use of his
faculties, which for the moment he seemed to have lost, Reilly did the
very commonplace thing that others before him have done when placed
unexpectedly in remarkable situations. He pinched himself to make sure
that he was in reality wide awake and in the natural possession of his
senses. He felt like pinching the figure in front of him also, but he
could not muster up the courage to do that. He stood there trying to
think it all out, and as his thoughts became less stagnant, his fright
dissolved under the process of reasoning his mind pursued. To reason a
thing out, even though an explanation can only be obtained by leaving
much of the subject unaccounted for, tends to make one bolder and less
shaky in the knees.

The series of strange incidents which he was experiencing had been
inaugurated in the old-fashioned dwelling he had visited after
information concerning the roads. And everything had been going along in
a perfectly normal way up to, the very moment when he had taken a drink
from the bottle found in the fireplace. But from that precise time
everything had gone wrongly. Hence the inference that the drinking of
the peculiar liquid was accountable in some way or other for his
troubles. There was a supernatural agency in the whole thing. That much
must be admitted. And whatever that agency was, and however it might be
accounted for, it had taken Reilly back into a period of time more than
a hundred years ago, and landed him, body and soul, within the lines of
the patriot forces wintering at Valley Forge. He might have stood there,
turning over and over in his mind, pinching himself and muttering, all
the morning, had not the newcomer ceased a silent but curious inspection
of his person, and asked: “Who are you, sir?”

“John Reilly, at your pleasure,” the young man replied, adding a
question on his own account: “And who are you, sir?”

Immediately he received a heavy thump on his back from Harry’s hard
fist.

“It is not for you to question the general,” the ragged administrator of
the blow exclaimed.

“And it is not for you to be so gay,” Reilly returned, angrily, giving
the blow back with added force.

“Here, here!” broke in the first questioner. “Fisticuffs under my very
nose! No more of this, I command you both.” To Harry he added an extra
caution: “Your zeal in my behalf will be better appreciated by being
less demonstrative. Blows should be struck only on the battlefield.” To
Reilly he said, with a slight smile hovering over his face, “My name is
Washington. Perhaps you may have heard of me?”

To this Reilly replied: “I have, indeed, and heard you very well spoken
of, too.” Emboldened by the other’s smile, he ventured another question:
“I think my reckoning of the day and year is badly at fault. An hour ago
I thought the day was Christmas day. How far out of the way did my
calculation take me, sir?”

“The day is indeed Christmas day, and the year is, as you must know, the
year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and seventy-seven.”

Reilly again pinched himself.

“Why do you bring this man to me?” Washington now inquired, turning to
Harry and his companions.

“He is a spy, sir,” said Harry.

“That is a lie!” Reilly indignantly interpolated. “I have done nothing
to warrant any such charge.”

“We found him in the Widow Robin’s house, pouring strong liquor down his
throat.”

“I had gone inside after information concerning the roads----”

“Which he was getting from a bottle, sir.”

“If drinking from a bottle of necessity constitutes being a spy, I fear
our camp is already a hotbed,” Washington somewhat sagely remarked,
casting his eye around slyly at his officers and men. “Tell me,” he went
on, with sudden sternness, looking Reilly through and through, as though
to read his very thoughts, “is the charge true? Do you come from Howe?”

“The charge is not true, sir. I come from no one. I simply am making a
tour of pleasure through this part of the country on my bicycle.”

“With the country swarming with the men from two hostile armies, any
kind of a tour, save one of absolute necessity, seems ill-timed.”

“When I set out I knew nothing about any armies. The fact is, sir----”
Reilly started to make an explanation, but he checked himself on
realizing that the telling of any such improbable yarn would only
increase the hazardousness of his position.

“Well?” Washington questioned, in a tone of growing suspicion.

“I certainly did not know that your army or any other army was
quartered in this vicinity.” Reilly hesitated for lack of something
further to say. “You see,” he finally added, prompted by a happy idea,
“I rode my wheel from New York.”

“You may have come from New York, though it is hard to believe you came
on that singular-looking machine so great a distance. Where is the horse
which drew the vehicle?”

Reilly touched his bicycle. “This is the horse, sir, just as it is; the
vehicle,” he said.

“The man is crazy!” Harry exclaimed. Washington only looked the
incredulity he felt, and this time asked a double question.

“How can the thing be balanced without it be held upright by a pair of
shafts from a horse’s back, and how is the motive power acquired?”

For an answer Reilly jumped upon the wheel, and at a considerable speed
and in a haphazard way pedaled around the space within the hollow square
of soldiers. Hither and thither he went, at one second nearly wheeling
over the toes of the line of astonished, if not frightened, militiamen;
at the next, bearing suddenly down on Harry and his companions and
making them dance and jump about most alertly to avoid a collision. Even
the dignified Washington was once or twice put to the necessity of
dodging hurriedly aside when his equilibrium was threatened. Reilly
eventually dismounted, doing so with assumed clumsiness by stopping the
wheel at Harry’s back and falling over heavily against the soldier.
Harry tumbled to the ground, but Reilly dexterously landed on his feet.
At once he began offering a profusion of apologies.

“You did that by design!” Harry shouted, jumping to his feet. His face
was red with anger and he shook his fist threateningly at the bicyclist.

Washington commanded the man to hold his peace. Then to Reilly he
expressed a great surprise at his performance and a desire to know more
about the bicycle. The young man thereupon described the machine
minutely, lifting it into the air and spinning the wheels to illustrate
how smoothly they rotated.

“I can see it is possible to ride the contrivance with rapidity. It has
been put together with wonderful ingenuity,” Washington said, when
Reilly had replaced the wheel on the ground.

“And you, sir, it is but a toy,” an officer spoke up. “Put our friend on
his bundle of tin and race him against one of our horsemen and he would
make a sorry showing.”

Reilly smiled. “I bear the gentleman no ill-will for his opinion,” he
said. “Still, I should like to show him by a practical test of the
subject that his ignorance of it is most profound.”

“You would test the speed of the machine against that of a horse?”
Washington said, in amazement.

“I would, sir. You have a good road yonder. With your permission and a
worthy opponent I would make the test at once.”

“But, sir, the man is a spy,” Harry broke in. “Would it not be better to
throw a rope around his neck and give him his deserts?”

“The charge is by no means proven,” Washington replied. “Nor can it be
until a court martial convenes this afternoon. And I see no reason why
we may not in the meantime enjoy the unique contest which has been
suggested. It will make a pleasant break in the routine of camp life.”

A murmur of approval went up from the masses of men by whom they were
surrounded. While they had been talking it seemed as though everybody in
the camp not already on the scene had gathered together behind the
square of infantry.

“Then, sir,” Harry said, with some eagerness, “I would like to be the
man to ride the horse. There is no better animal than mine anywhere. And
I understand his tricks and humors quite well enough to put him to his
best pace.”

“I confess I have heard you well spoken of as a horseman,” Washington
said. “Be away with you! Saddle and bridle your horse at once.”

It was the chain of singular circumstances narrated above which brought
John Reilly into the most remarkable contest of his life. He had entered
many bicycle races at one time or other, always with credit to himself
and to the club whose colors he wore. And he had every expectation of
making a good showing to-day. Yet a reflection of the weird conditions
which had brought about the present contest took away some of his
self-possession when a few minutes later he was marched over to the
turnpike and left to his own thoughts, while the officers were pacing
out a one mile straightaway course down the road.

After the measurements had been taken, two unbroken lines of soldiers
were formed along the entire mile; a most evident precaution against
Reilly leaving the race course at any point to escape across the fields.
Washington came up to him again, when the preparations were completed,
to shake his hand and whisper a word or two of encouragement in his ear.
Having performed these kindly acts he left to take up a position near
the point of finish.

The beginning of the course was located close to the battery of half
concealed field pieces. Reilly was now conducted to this place. Shortly
afterward Harry appeared on his horse. He leered at the bicyclist
contemptuously and said something of a sarcastic nature partly under his
breath when the two lined up, side by side, for the start. To these
slights Reilly paid no heed; he had a strong belief that when the race
was over there would be left in the mutton-like head of his opponent
very little of his present inclination toward the humorous. The
soldier’s mount was a handsome black mare, fourteen and a half hands
high; strong of limbs and at the flanks, and animated by a spirit that
kept her prancing around with continuous action. It must be admitted
that the man rode very well. He guided the animal with ease and
nonchalance when she reared and plunged, and kept her movements confined
to an incredibly small piece of ground, considering her abundance of
action.

“Keep to your own side of the road throughout the race. I don’t want to
be collided with by your big beast,” Reilly cautioned, while they were
awaiting two signals from the starter.

To this Harry replied in some derision, “I’ll give you a good share of
the road at the start, and all of it and my dust, too, afterward.” And
then the officer who held the pistol fired the first shot.

Reilly was well satisfied with the conditions under which the race was
to be made. The road was wide and level, smooth, hard and straight, and
a strong breeze which had sprung up, blew squarely against his back. His
wheel was geared up to eighty-four inches; the breeze promised to be a
valuable adjunct in pushing it along. Awaiting the second and last
signal, Reilly glanced down the two blue ranks of soldiers, which
stretched away into hazy lines in the distance and converged at the
termination of the course where a flag had been stuck into the ground.
The soldiers were at parade rest. Their unceasing movements as they
chatted to one another, turning their bodies this way and that and
craning their heads forward to look toward the starting point, and then
jerking them back, made the lines seem like long, squirming snakes. At
the end of the course a thick bunch of militiamen clogged the road and
overspread into the fields.

Crack! The signal to be off. Reilly shoved aside the fellow who had been
holding his wheel upright while astride of it, and pushed down on the
pedals. The mare’s hoofs dug the earth; her great muscular legs
straightened out; she sprang forward with a snort of apparent pleasure,
taking the lead at the very start. Reilly heard the shout of excitement
run along the two ranks of soldiers. He saw them waving their arms and
hats as he went by. And on ahead through the cloud of dust there was
visible the shadow-like outlines of the snorting, galloping horse, whose
hoof beats sounded clear and sharp above the din which came from the
sides of the highway. The mare crept farther and farther ahead. Very
soon a hundred feet or more of the road lay between her and the
bicyclist. Harry turned in his saddle and called out another sarcasm.

“I shall pass you very soon. Keep to your own side of the road!” Reilly
shouted, not a bit daunted by the way the race had commenced. His head
was well down over the handle-bars, his back had the shape of the upper
portion of an immense egg. Up and down his legs moved; faster and
faster and faster yet. He went by the soldiers so rapidly that they only
appeared to be two streaks of blurry color. Their sharp rasping shouts
sounded like the cracking of musketry. The cloud of dust blew against
the bicyclist’s head and into his mouth and throat. When he glanced
ahead again he saw with satisfaction that the mare was no longer
increasing her lead. It soon became evident even that he was slowly
cutting down the advantages she had secured.

Harry again turned his head shortly afterward, doubtless expecting to
find his opponent hopelessly distanced by this time. Instead of this
Reilly was alarmingly close upon him. The man ejaculated a sudden oath
and lashed his animal furiously. Straining every nerve and sinew the
mare for the moment pushed further ahead. Then her pace slackened a bit
and Reilly again crept up to her. Closer and closer to her than before,
until his head was abreast of her outstretched tail. Harry was lashing
the mare and swearing at her unceasingly now. But she had spurted once
and appeared to be incapable of again increasing her speed. In this way
they went on for some little distance, Harry using his whip brutally,
the mare desperately struggling to attain a greater pace, Reilly hanging
on with tenacity to her hind flanks and giving up not an inch of ground.

A mile is indeed a very short distance when traversed at such a pace.
The finishing flag was already but a few hundred feet further on.
Reilly realized that it was time now to go to the front. He gritted his
teeth together with determination and bent his head down even further
toward his front wheel. Then his feet began to move so quickly that
there was only visible an indistinct blur at the sides of his crank
shaft. At this very second, with a face marked with rage and hatred,
Harry brought his horse suddenly across the road to thet part of it
which he had been warned to avoid.

It is hard to tell what kept Reilly from being run into and trampled
under foot. An attempt at back pedaling, a sudden twist of the
handle-bar, a lurch to one side that almost threw him from his seat.
Then, in the fraction of a second he was over on the other side of the
road, pushing ahead of the mare almost as though she were standing
still. The outburst of alarm from the throats of the soldiers changed
when they saw that Reilly had not been injured; first into a shout of
indignation at the dastardly attempt which had been made to run him
down, and then into a roar of delight when the bicyclist breasted the
flag a winner of the race by twenty feet.

As he crossed the line Reilly caught a glimpse of Washington. He stood
close to the flag and was waving his hat in the air with the enthusiasm
of a schoolboy. Reilly went on down the road slackening his speed as
effectively as he could. But before it was possible to entirely stop
his wheel’s momentum the noisy acclamations in his rear ceased with
startling suddenness. He turned in his saddle and looked back. As sure
as St. Peter he had the road entirely to himself. There wasn’t a soldier
or the ghost of a soldier in sight.

As soon as he could he turned his bicycle about and rode slowly back
along the highway, now so singularly deserted, looking hither and
thither in vain for some trace of the vanished army. Even the flag which
had been stuck into the ground at the end of the one-mile race course
was gone. The breeze had died out again and the air was tranquil and
warm. In the branches of a nearby tree two sparrows chirped and
twittered peacefully. Reilly went back to the place where the camp had
been. He found there only open fields on one side of the road and a
clump of woodland on the other. He continued on down the little hill up
which Harry and his companions had brought him a few hours previously
and followed the road on further, coming finally to the fork in it near
which was located the old farmhouse wherein he had been taken captive.
The house was, as it had been when he had previously entered it, falling
apart from age and neglect. When he went inside he found lying on the
brick hearth in front of the fireplace a number of pieces of broken
glass.



PREFACE


In my Peasant Life in Bengal I make the peasant boy Govinda spend
some hours every evening in listening to stories told by an old woman,
who was called Sambhu's mother, and who was the best story-teller in
the village. On reading that passage, Captain R. C. Temple, of the
Bengal Staff Corps, son of the distinguished Indian administrator
Sir Richard Temple, wrote to me to say how interesting it would be to
get a collection of those unwritten stories which old women in India
recite to little children in the evenings, and to ask whether I could
not make such a collection. As I was no stranger to the Maehrchen of
the Brothers Grimm, to the Norse Tales so admirably told by Dasent,
to Arnason's Icelandic Stories translated by Powell, to the Highland
Stories done into English by Campbell, and to the fairy stories
collected by other writers, and as I believed that the collection
suggested would be a contribution, however slight, to that daily
increasing literature of folk-lore and comparative mythology which,
like comparative philosophy, proves that the swarthy and half-naked
peasant on the banks of the Ganges is a cousin, albeit of the
hundredth remove, to the fair-skinned and well-dressed Englishman
on the banks of the Thames, I readily caught up the idea and cast
about for materials. But where was an old story-telling woman to
be got? I had myself, when a little boy, heard hundreds--it would
be no exaggeration to say thousands--of fairy tales from that same
old woman, Sambhu's mother--for she was no fictitious person; she
actually lived in the flesh and bore that name; but I had nearly
forgotten those stories, at any rate they had all got confused in
my head, the tail of one story being joined to the head of another,
and the head of a third to the tail of a fourth. How I wished that
poor Sambhu's mother had been alive! But she had gone long, long ago,
to that bourne from which no traveller returns, and her son Sambhu,
too, had followed her thither. After a great deal of search I found
my Gammer Grethel--though not half so old as the Frau Viehmaennin of
Hesse-Cassel--in the person of a Bengali Christian woman, who, when
a little girl and living in her heathen home, had heard many stories
from her old grandmother. She was a good story-teller, but her stock
was not large; and after I had heard ten from her I had to look about
for fresh sources. An old Brahman told me two stories; an old barber,
three; an old servant of mine told me two; and the rest I heard from
another old Brahman. None of my authorities knew English; they all
told the stories in Bengali, and I translated them into English when
I came home. I heard many more stories than those contained in the
following pages; but I rejected a great many, as they appeared to me
to contain spurious additions to the original stories which I had
heard when a boy. I have reason to believe that the stories given
in this book are a genuine sample of the old old stories told by old
Bengali women from age to age through a hundred generations.

Sambhu's mother used always to end every one of her stories--and
every orthodox Bengali story-teller does the same--with repeating
the following formula:--


            Thus my story endeth,
            The Natiya-thorn withereth.
           "Why, O Natiya-thorn, dost wither?"
           "Why does thy cow on me browse?"
           "Why, O cow, dost thou browse?"
           "Why does thy neat-herd not tend me?"
           "Why, O neat-herd, dost not tend the cow?"
           "Why does thy daughter-in-law not give me rice?"
           "Why, O daughter-in-law, dost not give rice?"
           "Why does my child cry?"
           "Why, O child, dost thou cry?"
           "Why does the ant bite me?"
           "Why, O ant, dost thou bite?"
            Koot! koot! koot!


What these lines mean, why they are repeated at the end of every
story, and what the connection is of the several parts to one another,
I do not know. Perhaps the whole is a string of nonsense purposely
put together to amuse little children.


Lal Behari Day.

Hooghly College,

February 27, 1883.







CONTENTS


                                                               PAGE
         1. Life's Secret                                         1
         2. Phakir Chand                                         16
         3. The Indigent Brahman                                 51
         4. The Story of the Rakshasas                           61
         5. The Story of Swet-Basanta                            89
         6. The Evil Eye of Sani                                104
         7. The Boy whom Seven Mothers suckled                  113
         8. The Story of Prince Sobur                           119
         9. The Origin of Opium                                 132
        10. Strike but Hear                                     140
        11. The Adventures of Two Thieves and of their Sons     152
        12. The Ghost-Brahman                                   173
        13. The Man who wished to be Perfect                    178
        14. A Ghostly Wife                                      188
        15. The Story of a Brahmadaitya                         192
        16. The Story of a Hiraman                              200
        17. The Origin of Rubies                                211
        18. The Match-making Jackal                             217
        19. The Boy with the Moon on his Forehead               227
        20. The Ghost who was Afraid of being Bagged            247
        21. The Field of Bones                                  251
        22. The Bald Wife                                       269







ILLUSTRATIONS


                                                        Facing page

        "She rushed out of the palace ... and came to the
        upper world" (p. 26)                           Frontispiece
        "The Suo queen went to the door with a handful
        of rice"                                                  1
        "The prince revived, and, walking about, saw a human
        figure near the gate"                                     9
        "She took up the jewel in her hand, left the palace,
        and successfully reached the upper world"                22
        "He rushed out of his hiding-place and killed the
        serpent"                                                 43
        "Instead of sweetmeats about a score of demons"          56
        "At the door of which stood a lady of exquisite
        beauty"                                                  62
        "In a trice she woke up, sat up in her bed, and
        eyeing the stranger, inquired who he was"                77
        The Girl of the Wall-Almirah                             90
        "On a sudden an elephant gorgeously caparisoned shot
        across his path"                                         95
        "They then set out on their journey"                    106
        "A monstrous bird comes out apparently from the
        palace"                                                 117
        "Hundreds of peacocks of gorgeous plumes came to the
        embankments to eat the khai"                            123
        "'You would adorn the palace of the mightiest
        sovereign'"                                             138
        "He saw a beautiful woman coming out of the palace"     141
        "'Husband, take up all this large quantity of gold
        and these precious stones'"                             145
        "They ran away in great fear, leaving behind them
        the money and jewels"                                   162
        "The camel-driver alighted, tied the camel to a
        tree on the spot, and began smoking"                    170
        "'How is it that you have returned so soon?'"           174
        "At dawn he used to cull flowers in the forest"         181
        "The Brahman's wife had occasion to go to the tank,
        and as she went she brushed by a Sankchinni"            188
        "The moment the first stroke was given, a great many
        ghosts rushed towards the Brahman"                      194
        "The lady, king, and hiraman all reached the king's
        capital safe and sound"                                 210
        "'What princess ever puts only one ruby in her
        hair?'"                                                 214
        "Coming up to the surface they climbed into the
        boat"                                                   216
        "The jackal ... opened his bundle of betel-leaves,
        put some into his mouth, and began chewing them"        218
        "A bright light, like that of the moon, was seen
        shining on his forehead"                                237
        "The six queens tried to comfort him"                   238
        "'Now, barber, I am going to destroy you. Who will
        protect you?'"                                          248
        "They approached a magnificent pile of buildings"       259
        "Thus the princess was deserted"                        266
        "When she got out of the water, what a change was
        seen in her!"                                           271







I

LIFE'S SECRET


There was a king who had two queens, Duo and Suo. [1] Both of them
were childless. One day a Faquir (mendicant) came to the palace-gate
to ask for alms. The Suo queen went to the door with a handful of
rice. The mendicant asked whether she had any children. On being
answered in the negative, the holy mendicant refused to take alms, as
the hands of a woman unblessed with child are regarded as ceremonially
unclean. He offered her a drug for removing her barrenness, and she
expressing her willingness to receive it, he gave it to her with the
following directions:--"Take this nostrum, swallow it with the juice
of the pomegranate flower; if you do this, you will have a son in due
time. The son will be exceedingly handsome, and his complexion will
be of the colour of the pomegranate flower; and you shall call him
Dalim Kumar. [2] As enemies will try to take away the life of your
son, I may as well tell you that the life of the boy will be bound up
in the life of a big boal fish which is in your tank, in front of the
palace. In the heart of the fish is a small box of wood, in the box is
a necklace of gold, that necklace is the life of your son. Farewell."

In the course of a month or so it was whispered in the palace
that the Suo queen had hopes of an heir. Great was the joy of
the king. Visions of an heir to the throne, and of a never-ending
succession of powerful monarchs perpetuating his dynasty to the
latest generations, floated before his mind, and made him glad as he
had never been in his life. The usual ceremonies performed on such
occasions were celebrated with great pomp; and the subjects made loud
demonstrations of their joy at the anticipation of so auspicious an
event as the birth of a prince. In the fulness of time the Suo queen
gave birth to a son of uncommon beauty. When the king the first time
saw the face of the infant, his heart leaped with joy. The ceremony
of the child's first rice was celebrated with extraordinary pomp,
and the whole kingdom was filled with gladness.

In course of time Dalim Kumar grew up a fine boy. Of all sports he was
most addicted to playing with pigeons. This brought him into frequent
contact with his stepmother, the Duo queen, into whose apartments
Dalim's pigeons had a trick of always flying. The first time the
pigeons flew into her rooms, she readily gave them up to the owner;
but the second time she gave them up with some reluctance. The fact
is that the Duo queen, perceiving that Dalim's pigeons had this happy
knack of flying into her apartments, wished to take advantage of it
for the furtherance of her own selfish views. She naturally hated the
child, as the king, since his birth, neglected her more than ever,
and idolised the fortunate mother of Dalim. She had heard, it is not
known how, that the holy mendicant that had given the famous pill
to the Suo queen had also told her of a secret connected with the
child's life. She had heard that the child's life was bound up with
something--she did not know with what. She determined to extort that
secret from the boy. Accordingly, the next time the pigeons flew
into her rooms, she refused to give them up, addressing the child
thus:--"I won't give the pigeons up unless you tell me one thing."

Dalim. What thing, mamma?

Duo. Nothing particular, my darling; I only want to know in what your
life is.

Dalim. What is that, mamma? Where can my life be except in me?

Duo. No, child; that is not what I mean. A holy mendicant told your
mother that your life is bound up with something. I wish to know what
that thing is.

Dalim. I never heard of any such thing, mamma.

Duo. If you promise to inquire of your mother in what thing your
life is, and if you tell me what your mother says, then I will let
you have the pigeons, otherwise not.

Dalim. Very well, I'll inquire, and let you know. Now, please, give
me my pigeons.

Duo. I'll give them on one condition more. Promise to me that you
will not tell your mother that I want the information.

Dalim. I promise.

The Duo queen let go the pigeons, and Dalim, overjoyed to find again
his beloved birds, forgot every syllable of the conversation he had
had with his stepmother. The next day, however, the pigeons again flew
into the Duo queen's rooms. Dalim went to his stepmother, who asked
him for the required information. The boy promised to ask his mother
that very day, and begged hard for the release of the pigeons. The
pigeons were at last delivered. After play, Dalim went to his mother
and said--"Mamma, please tell me in what my life is contained." "What
do you mean, child?" asked the mother, astonished beyond measure at
the child's extraordinary question. "Yes, mamma," rejoined the child,
"I have heard that a holy mendicant told you that my life is contained
in something. Tell me what that thing is." "My pet, my darling, my
treasure, my golden moon, do not ask such an inauspicious question. Let
the mouth of my enemies be covered with ashes, and let my Dalim live
for ever," said the mother, earnestly. But the child insisted on being
informed of the secret. He said he would not eat or drink anything
unless the information were given him. The Suo queen, pressed by the
importunity of her son, in an evil hour told the child the secret of
his life. The next day the pigeons again, as fate would have it, flew
into the Duo queen's rooms. Dalim went for them; the stepmother plied
the boy with sugared words, and obtained the knowledge of the secret.

The Duo queen, on learning the secret of Dalim Kumar's life, lost
no time in using it for the prosecution of her malicious design. She
told her maid-servants to get for her some dried stalks of the hemp
plant, which are very brittle, and which, when pressed upon, make
a peculiar noise, not unlike the cracking of joints of bones in the
human body. These hemp stalks she put under her bed, upon which she
laid herself down and gave out that she was dangerously ill. The
king, though he did not love her so well as his other queen, was
in duty bound to visit her in her illness. The queen pretended that
her bones were all cracking; and sure enough, when she tossed from
one side of her bed to the other, the hemp stalks made the noise
wanted. The king, believing that the Duo queen was seriously ill,
ordered his best physician to attend her. With that physician the
Duo queen was in collusion. The physician said to the king that for
the queen's complaint there was but one remedy, which consisted in
the outward application of something to be found inside a large boal
fish which was in the tank before the palace. The king's fisherman was
accordingly called and ordered to catch the boal in question. On the
first throw of the net the fish was caught. It so happened that Dalim
Kumar, along with other boys, was playing not far from the tank. The
moment the boal fish was caught in the net, that moment Dalim felt
unwell; and when the fish was brought up to land, Dalim fell down on
the ground, and made as if he was about to breathe his last. He was
immediately taken into his mother's room, and the king was astonished
on hearing of the sudden illness of his son and heir. The fish was
by the order of the physician taken into the room of the Duo queen,
and as it lay on the floor striking its fins on the ground, Dalim
in his mother's room was given up for lost. When the fish was cut
open, a casket was found in it; and in the casket lay a necklace of
gold. The moment the necklace was worn by the queen, that very moment
Dalim died in his mother's room.

When the news of the death of his son and heir reached the king he was
plunged into an ocean of grief, which was not lessened in any degree
by the intelligence of the recovery of the Duo queen. He wept over
his dead Dalim so bitterly that his courtiers were apprehensive of a
permanent derangement of his mental powers. The king would not allow
the dead body of his son to be either buried or burnt. He could not
realise the fact of his son's death; it was so entirely causeless
and so terribly sudden. He ordered the dead body to be removed to
one of his garden-houses in the suburbs of the city, and to be laid
there in state. He ordered that all sorts of provisions should be
stowed away in that house, as if the young prince needed them for his
refection. Orders were issued that the house should be kept locked
up day and night, and that no one should go into it except Dalim's
most intimate friend, the son of the king's prime minister, who was
intrusted with the key of the house, and who obtained the privilege
of entering it once in twenty-four hours.

As, owing to her great loss, the Suo queen lived in retirement,
the king gave up his nights entirely to the Duo queen. The latter,
in order to allay suspicion, used to put aside the gold necklace at
night; and, as fate had ordained that Dalim should be in the state
of death only during the time that the necklace was round the neck
of the queen, he passed into the state of life whenever the necklace
was laid aside. Accordingly Dalim revived every night, as the Duo
queen every night put away the necklace, and died again the next
morning when the queen put it on. When Dalim became reanimated
at night he ate whatever food he liked, for of such there was a
plentiful stock in the garden-house, walked about on the premises,
and meditated on the singularity of his lot. Dalim's friend, who
visited him only during the day, found him always lying a lifeless
corpse; but what struck him after some days was the singular fact that
the body remained in the same state in which he saw it on the first
day of his visit. There was no sign of putrefaction. Except that it
was lifeless and pale, there were no symptoms of corruption--it was
apparently quite fresh. Unable to account for so strange a phenomenon,
he determined to watch the corpse more closely, and to visit it not
only during the day but sometimes also at night. The first night that
he paid his visit he was astounded to see his dead friend sauntering
about in the garden. At first he thought the figure might be only
the ghost of his friend, but on feeling him and otherwise examining
him, he found the apparition to be veritable flesh and blood. Dalim
related to his friend all the circumstances connected with his death;
and they both concluded that he revived at nights only because the
Duo queen put aside her necklace when the king visited her. As the
life of the prince depended on the necklace, the two friends laid
their heads together to devise if possible some plans by which they
might get possession of it. Night after night they consulted together,
but they could not think of any feasible scheme. At length the gods
brought about the deliverance of Dalim Kumar in a wonderful manner.

Some years before the time of which we are speaking, the sister of
Bidhata-Purusha [3] was delivered of a daughter. The anxious mother
asked her brother what he had written on her child's forehead;
to which Bidhata-Purusha replied that she should get married to a
dead bridegroom. Maddened as she became with grief at the prospect of
such a dreary destiny for her daughter, she yet thought it useless to
remonstrate with her brother, for she well knew that he never changed
what he once wrote. As the child grew in years she became exceedingly
beautiful, but the mother could not look upon her with pleasure in
consequence of the portion allotted to her by her divine brother. When
the girl came to marriageable age, the mother resolved to flee from
the country with her, and thus avert her dreadful destiny. But the
decrees of fate cannot thus be overruled. In the course of their
wanderings the mother and daughter arrived at the gate of that very
garden-house in which Dalim Kumar lay. It was evening. The girl said
she was thirsty and wanted to drink water. The mother told her daughter
to sit at the gate, while she went to search for drinking water in some
neighbouring hut. In the meantime the girl through curiosity pushed
the door of the garden-house, which opened of itself. She then went
in and saw a beautiful palace, and was wishing to come out when the
door shut itself of its own accord, so that she could not get out. As
night came on the prince revived, and, walking about, saw a human
figure near the gate. He went up to it, and found it was a girl of
surpassing beauty. On being asked who she was, she told Dalim Kumar
all the details of her little history,--how her uncle, the divine
Bidhata-Purusha, wrote on her forehead at her birth that she should
get married to a dead bridegroom, how her mother had no pleasure in
her life at the prospect of so terrible a destiny, and how, therefore,
on the approach of her womanhood, with a view to avert so dreadful a
catastrophe, she had left her house with her and wandered in various
places, how they came to the gate of the garden-house, and how her
mother had now gone in search of drinking water for her. Dalim Kumar,
hearing her simple and pathetic story, said, "I am the dead bridegroom,
and you must get married to me, come with me to the house." "How
can you be said to be a dead bridegroom when you are standing and
speaking to me?" said the girl. "You will understand it afterwards,"
rejoined the prince, "come now and follow me." The girl followed the
prince into the house. As she had been fasting the whole day the
prince hospitably entertained her. As for the mother of the girl,
the sister of the divine Bidhata-Purusha, she returned to the gate
of the garden-house after it was dark, cried out for her daughter,
and getting no answer, went away in search of her in the huts in the
neighbourhood. It is said that after this she was not seen anywhere.

While the niece of the divine Bidhata-Purusha was partaking of the
hospitality of Dalim Kumar, his friend as usual made his appearance. He
was surprised not a little at the sight of the fair stranger; and his
surprise became greater when he heard the story of the young lady from
her own lips. It was forthwith resolved that very night to unite the
young couple in the bonds of matrimony. As priests were out of the
question, the hymeneal rites were performed a la Gandharva. [4] The
friend of the bridegroom took leave of the newly-married couple and
went away to his house. As the happy pair had spent the greater part
of the night in wakefulness, it was long after sunrise that they awoke
from their sleep;--I should have said that the young wife woke from her
sleep, for the prince had become a cold corpse, life having departed
from him. The feelings of the young wife may be easily imagined. She
shook her husband, imprinted warm kisses on his cold lips, but in
vain. He was as lifeless as a marble statue. Stricken with horror, she
smote her breast, struck her forehead with the palms of her hands, tore
her hair and went about in the house and in the garden as if she had
gone mad. Dalim's friend did not come into the house during the day,
as he deemed it improper to pay a visit to her while her husband was
lying dead. The day seemed to the poor girl as long as a year, but the
longest day has its end, and when the shades of evening were descending
upon the landscape, her dead husband was awakened into consciousness;
he rose up from his bed, embraced his disconsolate wife, ate, drank,
and became merry. His friend made his appearance as usual, and the
whole night was spent in gaiety and festivity. Amid this alternation
of life and death did the prince and his lady spend some seven or
eight years, during which time the princess presented her husband
with two lovely boys who were the exact image of their father.

It is superfluous to remark that the king, the two queens, and other
members of the royal household did not know that Dalim Kumar was
living, at any rate, was living at night. They all thought that he
was long ago dead and his corpse burnt. But the heart of Dalim's wife
was yearning after her mother-in-law, whom she had never seen. She
conceived a plan by which she might be able not only to have a
sight of her mother-in-law, but also to get hold of the Duo queen's
necklace, on which her husband's life was dependent. With the consent
of her husband and of his friend she disguised herself as a female
barber. Like every female barber she took a bundle containing the
following articles:--an iron instrument for paring nails, another
iron instrument for scraping off the superfluous flesh of the soles
of the feet, a piece of jhama or burnt brick for rubbing the soles of
the feet with, and alakta [5] for painting the edges of the feet and
toes with. Taking this bundle in her hand she stood at the gate of the
king's palace with her two boys. She declared herself to be a barber,
and expressed a desire to see the Suo queen, who readily gave her an
interview. The queen was quite taken up with the two little boys, who,
she declared, strongly reminded her of her darling Dalim Kumar. Tears
fell profusely from her eyes at the recollection of her lost treasure;
but she of course had not the remotest idea that the two little boys
were the sons of her own dear Dalim. She told the supposed barber
that she did not require her services, as, since the death of her
son, she had given up all terrestrial vanities, and among others the
practice of dyeing her feet red; but she added that, nevertheless,
she would be glad now and then to see her and her two fine boys. The
female barber, for so we must now call her, then went to the quarters
of the Duo queen and offered her services. The queen allowed her to
pare her nails, to scrape off the superfluous flesh of her feet,
and to paint them with alakta and was so pleased with her skill,
and the sweetness of her disposition, that she ordered her to wait
upon her periodically. The female barber noticed with no little
concern the necklace round the queen's neck. The day of her second
visit came on, and she instructed the elder of her two sons to set
up a loud cry in the palace, and not to stop crying till he got into
his hands the Duo queen's necklace. The female barber, accordingly,
went again on the appointed day to the Duo queen's apartments. While
she was engaged in painting the queen's feet, the elder boy set up a
loud cry. On being asked the reason of the cry, the boy, as previously
instructed, said that he wanted the queen's necklace. The queen said
that it was impossible for her to part with that particular necklace,
for it was the best and most valuable of all her jewels. To gratify
the boy, however, she took it off her neck, and put it into the
boy's hand. The boy stopped crying and held the necklace tight in
his hand. As the female barber after she had done her work was about
to go away, the queen wanted the necklace back. But the boy would
not part with it. When his mother attempted to snatch it from him,
he wept bitterly, and showed as if his heart would break. On which
the female barber said--"Will your Majesty be gracious enough to let
the boy take the necklace home with him? When he falls asleep after
drinking his milk, which he is sure to do in the course of an hour,
I will carefully bring it back to you." The queen, seeing that the
boy would not allow it to be taken away from him, agreed to the
proposal of the female barber, especially reflecting that Dalim,
whose life depended on it, had long ago gone to the abodes of death.

Thus possessed of the treasure on which the life of her husband
depended, the woman went with breathless haste to the garden-house and
presented the necklace to Dalim, who had been restored to life. Their
joy knew no bounds, and by the advice of their friend they determined
the next day to go to the palace in state, and present themselves to
the king and the Suo queen. Due preparations were made; an elephant,
richly caparisoned, was brought for the prince Dalim Kumar, a pair
of ponies for the two little boys, and a chaturdala [6] furnished
with curtains of gold lace for the princess. Word was sent to the
king and the Suo queen that the prince Dalim Kumar was not only
alive, but that he was coming to visit his royal parents with his
wife and sons. The king and Suo queen could hardly believe in the
report, but being assured of its truth they were entranced with joy;
while the Duo queen, anticipating the disclosure of all her wiles,
became overwhelmed with grief. The procession of Dalim Kumar, which
was attended by a band of musicians, approached the palace-gate; and
the king and Suo queen went out to receive their long-lost son. It is
needless to say that their joy was intense. They fell on each other's
neck and wept. Dalim then related all the circumstances connected
with his death. The king, inflamed with rage, ordered the Duo queen
into his presence. A large hole, as deep as the height of a man,
was dug in the ground. The Duo queen was put into it in a standing
posture. Prickly thorn was heaped around her up to the crown of her
head; and in this manner she was buried alive.


            Thus my story endeth,
            The Natiya-thorn withereth;
           "Why, O Natiya-thorn, dost wither?"
           "Why does thy cow on me browse?"
           "Why, O cow, dost thou browse?"
           "Why does thy neat-herd not tend me?"
           "Why, O neat-herd, dost not tend the cow?"
           "Why does thy daughter-in-law not give me rice?"
           "Why, O daughter-in-law, dost not give rice?"
           "Why does my child cry?"
           "Why, O child, dost thou cry?"
           "Why does the ant bite me?"
           "Why, O ant, dost thou bite?"
            Koot! koot! koot!







II

PHAKIR CHAND


There was a king's son, and there was a minister's son. They loved
each other dearly; they sat together, they stood up together, they
walked together, they ate together, they slept together, they got up
together. In this way they spent many years in each other's company,
till they both felt a desire to see foreign lands. So one day they
set out on their journey. Though very rich, the one being the son of
a king and the other the son of his chief minister, they did not take
any servants with them; they went by themselves on horseback. The
horses were beautiful to look at; they were pakshirajes, or kings
of birds. The king's son and the minister's son rode together many
days. They passed through extensive plains covered with paddy; through
cities, towns, and villages; through waterless, treeless deserts;
through dense forests which were the abode of the tiger and the
bear. One evening they were overtaken by night in a region where human
habitations were not seen; and as it was getting darker and darker,
they dismounted beneath a lofty tree, tied their horses to its trunk,
and, climbing up, sat on its branches covered with thick foliage. The
tree grew near a large tank, the water of which was as clear as the
eye of a crow. The king's son and the minister's son made themselves
as comfortable as they could on the tree, being determined to spend
on its branches the livelong night. They sometimes chatted together in
whispers on account of the lonely terrors of the region; they sometimes
sat demurely silent for some minutes; and anon they were falling into
a doze, when their attention was arrested by a terrible sight.

A sound like the rush of many waters was heard from the middle of the
tank. A huge serpent was seen leaping up from under the water with its
hood of enormous size. It "lay floating many a rood"; then it swam
ashore, and went about hissing. But what most of all attracted the
attention of the king's son and the minister's son was a brilliant
manikya (jewel) on the crested hood of the serpent. It shone like
a thousand diamonds. It lit up the tank, its embankments, and the
objects round about. The serpent doffed the jewel from its crest and
threw it on the ground, and then it went about hissing in search of
food. The two friends sitting on the tree greatly admired the wonderful
brilliant, shedding ineffable lustre on everything around. They had
never before seen anything like it; they had only heard of it as
equalling the treasures of seven kings. Their admiration, however,
was soon changed into sorrow and fear; for the serpent came hissing
to the foot of the tree on the branches of which they were seated,
and swallowed up, one by one, the horses tied to the trunk. They
feared that they themselves would be the next victims, when, to their
infinite relief, the gigantic cobra turned away from the tree, and went
about roaming to a great distance. The minister's son, seeing this,
bethought himself of taking possession of the lustrous stone. He had
heard that the only way to hide the brilliant light of the jewel was
to cover it with cow-dung or horse-dung, a quantity of which latter
article he perceived lying at the foot of the tree. He came down from
the tree softly, picked up the horse-dung, threw it upon the precious
stone, and again climbed into the tree. The serpent, not perceiving
the light of its head-jewel, rushed with great fury to the spot
where it had been left. Its hissings, groans, and convulsions were
terrible. It went round and round the jewel covered with horse-dung,
and then breathed its last. Early next morning the king's son and the
minister's son alighted from the tree, and went to the spot where the
crest-jewel was. The mighty serpent lay there perfectly lifeless. The
minister's son took up in his hand the jewel covered with horse-dung;
and both of them went to the tank to wash it. When all the horse-dung
had been washed off, the jewel shone as brilliantly as before. It
lit up the entire bed of the tank, and exposed to their view the
innumerable fishes swimming about in the waters. But what was their
astonishment when they saw, by the light of the jewel, in the bottom
of the tank, the lofty walls of what seemed a magnificent palace. The
venturesome son of the minister proposed to the prince that they should
dive into the waters and get at the palace below. They both dived into
the waters--the jewel being in the hand of the minister's son--and
in a moment stood at the gate of the palace. The gate was open. They
saw no being, human or superhuman. They went inside the gate, and
saw a beautiful garden laid out on the ample grounds round about the
house which was in the centre. The king's son and the minister's son
had never seen such a profusion of flowers. The rose with its many
varieties, the jessamine, the bel, the mallika, the king of smells,
the lily of the valley, the Champaka, and a thousand other sorts
of sweet-scented flowers were there. And of each of these flowers
there seemed to be a large number. Here were a hundred rose-bushes,
there many acres covered with the delicious jessamine, while yonder
were extensive plantations of all sorts of flowers. As all the
plants were begemmed with flowers, and as the flowers were in full
bloom, the air was loaded with rich perfume. It was a wilderness of
sweets. Through this paradise of perfumery they proceeded towards
the house, which was surrounded by banks of lofty trees. They stood
at the door of the house. It was a fairy palace. The walls were of
burnished gold, and here and there shone diamonds of dazzling hue
which were stuck into the walls. They did not meet with any beings,
human or other. They went inside, which was richly furnished. They
went from room to room, but they did not see any one. It seemed to be
a deserted house. At last, however, they found in one room a young lady
lying down, apparently in sleep, on a bed of golden framework. She was
of exquisite beauty; her complexion was a mixture of red and white;
and her age was apparently about sixteen. The king's son and the
minister's son gazed upon her with rapture; but they had not stood
long when this young lady of superb beauty opened her eyes, which
seemed like those of a gazelle. On seeing the strangers she said:
"How have you come here, ye unfortunate men? Begone, begone! This
is the abode of a mighty serpent, which has devoured my father,
my mother, my brothers, and all my relatives; I am the only one
of my family that he has spared. Flee for your lives, or else the
serpent will put you both in its capacious maw." The minister's son
told the princess how the serpent had breathed its last; how he and
his friend had got possession of its head-jewel, and by its light
had come to her palace. She thanked the strangers for delivering her
from the infernal serpent, and begged of them to live in the house,
and never to desert her. The king's son and the minister's son gladly
accepted the invitation. The king's son, smitten with the charms of
the peerless princess, married her after a short time; and as there
was no priest there, the hymeneal knot was tied by a simple exchange
of garlands of flowers.

The king's son became inexpressibly happy in the company of the
princess, who was as amiable in her disposition as she was beautiful
in her person; and though the wife of the minister's son was living in
the upper world, he too participated in his friend's happiness. Time
thus passed merrily, when the king's son bethought himself of returning
to his native country; and as it was fit that he should go with his
princess in due pomp, it was determined that the minister's son
should first ascend from the subaqueous regions, go to the king,
and bring with him attendants, horses, and elephants for the happy
pair. The snake-jewel was therefore had in requisition. The prince,
with the jewel in hand, accompanied the minister's son to the upper
world, and bidding adieu to his friend returned to his lovely wife in
the enchanted palace. Before leaving, the minister's son appointed
the day and the hour when he would stand on the high embankments of
the tank with horses, elephants, and attendants, and wait upon the
prince and the princess, who were to join him in the upper world by
means of the jewel.

Leaving the minister's son to wend his way to his country and to make
preparations for the return of his king's son, let us see how the happy
couple in the subterranean palace were passing their time. One day,
while the prince was sleeping after his noonday meal, the princess,
who had never seen the upper regions, felt the desire of visiting them,
and the rather as the snake-jewel, which alone could give her safe
conduct through the waters, was at that moment shedding its bright
effulgence in the room. She took up the jewel in her hand, left the
palace, and successfully reached the upper world. No mortal caught
her sight. She sat on the flight of steps with which the tank was
furnished for the convenience of bathers, scrubbed her body, washed
her hair, disported in the waters, walked about on the water's edge,
admired all the scenery around, and returned to her palace, where
she found her husband still locked in the embrace of sleep. When the
prince woke up, she did not tell him a word about her adventure. The
following day at the same hour, when her husband was asleep, she paid
a second visit to the upper world, and went back unnoticed by mortal
man. As success made her bold, she repeated her adventure a third
time. It so chanced that on that day the son of the Rajah, in whose
territories the tank was situated, was out on a hunting excursion,
and had pitched his tent not far from the place. While his attendants
were engaged in cooking their noon-day meal, the Rajah's son sauntered
about on the embankments of the tank, near which an old woman was
gathering sticks and dried branches of trees for purposes of fuel. It
was while the Rajah's son and the old woman were near the tank that
the princess paid her third visit to the upper world. She rose up
from the waters, gazed around, and seeing a man and a woman on the
banks again went down. The Rajah's son caught a momentary glimpse of
the princess, and so did the old woman gathering sticks. The Rajah's
son stood gazing on the waters. He had never seen such a beauty. She
seemed to him to be one of those deva-kanyas, heavenly goddesses,
of whom he had read in old books, and who are said now and then to
favour the lower world with their visits, which, like angel visits,
are "few and far between." The unearthly beauty of the princess,
though he had seen her only for a moment, made a deep impression on
his heart, and distracted his mind. He stood there like a statue, for
hours, gazing on the waters, in the hope of seeing the lovely figure
again. But in vain. The princess did not appear again. The Rajah's
son became mad with love. He kept muttering--"Now here, now gone! Now
here, now gone!" He would not leave the place till he was forcibly
removed by the attendants who had now come to him. He was taken to his
father's palace in a state of hopeless insanity. He spoke to nobody;
he always sobbed heavily; and the only words which proceeded out of
his mouth--and he was muttering them every minute--were, "Now here, now
gone! Now here, now gone!" The Rajah's grief may well be conceived. He
could not imagine what should have deranged his son's mind. The words,
"Now here, now gone," which ever and anon issued from his son's
lips, were a mystery to him; he could not unravel their meaning;
neither could the attendants throw any light on the subject. The best
physicians of the country were consulted, but to no effect. The sons
of AEsculapius could not ascertain the cause of the madness, far less
could they cure it. To the many inquiries of the physicians, the only
reply made by the Rajah's son was the stereotyped words--"Now here,
now gone! Now here, now gone!"

The Rajah, distracted with grief on account of the obscuration of
his son's intellects, caused a proclamation to be made in the capital
by beat of drum, to the effect that, if any person could explain the
cause of his son's madness and cure it, such a person would be rewarded
with the hand of the Rajah's daughter, and with the possession of half
his kingdom. The drum was beaten round most parts of the city, but no
one touched it, as no one knew the cause of the madness of the Rajah's
son. At last an old woman touched the drum, and declared that she would
not only discover the cause of the madness, but cure it. This woman,
who was the identical woman that was gathering sticks near the tank
at the time the Rajah's son lost his reason, had a crack-brained son
of the name of Phakir Chand, and was in consequence called Phakir's
mother, or more familiarly Phakre's mother. When the woman was brought
before the Rajah, the following conversation took place:--

Rajah. You are the woman that touched the drum.--You know the cause
of my son's madness?

Phakir's Mother. Yes, O incarnation of justice! I know the cause,
but I will not mention it till I have cured your son.

Rajah. How can I believe that you are able to cure my son, when the
best physicians of the land have failed?

Phakir's Mother. You need not now believe, my lord, till I have
performed the cure. Many an old woman knows secrets with which wise
men are unacquainted.

Rajah. Very well, let me see what you can do. In what time will you
perform the cure?

Phakir's Mother. It is impossible to fix the time at present; but I
will begin work immediately with your lordship's assistance.

Rajah. What help do you require from me?

Phakir's Mother. Your lordship will please order a hut to be raised on
the embankment of the tank where your son first caught the disease. I
mean to live in that hut for a few days. And your lordship will also
please order some of your servants to be in attendance at a distance of
about a hundred yards from the hut, so that they might be within call.

Rajah. Very well; I will order that to be immediately done. Do you
want anything else?

Phakir's Mother. Nothing else, my lord, in the way of preparations. But
it is as well to remind your lordship of the conditions on which I
undertake the cure. Your lordship has promised to give to the performer
of the cure the hand of your daughter and half your kingdom. As I
am a woman and cannot marry your daughter, I beg that, in case I
perform the cure, my son Phakir Chand may marry your daughter and
take possession of half your kingdom.

Rajah. Agreed, agreed.

A temporary hut was in a few hours erected on the embankment of the
tank, and Phakir's mother took up her abode in it. An outpost was
also erected at some distance for servants in attendance who might
be required to give help to the woman. Strict orders were given by
Phakir's mother that no human being should go near the tank excepting
herself. Let us leave Phakir's mother keeping watch at the tank, and
hasten down into the subterranean palace to see what the prince and
the princess are about. After the mishap which had occurred on her
last visit to the upper world, the princess had given up the idea of
a fourth visit. But women generally have greater curiosity than men;
and the princess of the underground palace was no exception to the
general rule. One day, while her husband was asleep as usual after
his noonday meal, she rushed out of the palace with the snake-jewel in
her hand, and came to the upper world. The moment the upheaval of the
waters in the middle of the tank took place, Phakir's mother, who was
on the alert, concealed herself in the hut and began looking through
the chinks of the matted wall. The princess, seeing no mortal near,
came to the bank, and sitting there began to scrub her body. Phakir's
mother showed herself outside the hut, and addressing the princess,
said in a winning tone--"Come, my child, thou queen of beauty, come
to me, and I will help you to bathe." So saying, she approached the
princess, who, seeing that it was only a woman, made no resistance. The
old woman, while in the act of washing the hair of the princess,
noticed the bright jewel in her hand, and said--"Put the jewel here
till you are bathed." In a moment the jewel was in the possession
of Phakir's mother, who wrapped it up in the cloth that was round
her waist. Knowing the princess to be unable to escape, she gave the
signal to the attendants in waiting, who rushed to the tank and made
the princess a captive.

Great were the rejoicings of the people when the tidings reached the
city that Phakir's mother had captured a water-nymph from the nether
regions. The whole city came to see the "daughter of the immortals,"
as they called the princess. When she was brought to the palace and
confronted with the Rajah's son of obscured intellect, the latter
said with a shout of exultation--"I have found! I have found!" The
cloud which had settled on his brain was dissipated in a moment. The
eyes, erewhile vacant and lustreless, now glowed with the fire of
intelligence; his tongue, of which he had almost lost the use--the
only words which he used to utter being, "Now here, now gone!"--was
now relaxed: in a word, he was restored to his senses. The joy of the
Rajah knew no bounds. There was great festivity in the city; and the
people who showered benedictions on the head of Phakir Chand's mother,
expected the speedy celebration of the marriage of the Rajah's son
with the beauty of the nether world. The princess, however, told the
Rajah, through Phakir's mother, that she had made a vow to the effect
that she would not, for one whole year, look at the face of another
man than that of her husband who was dwelling beneath the waters,
and that therefore the marriage could not be performed during that
period. Though the Rajah's son was somewhat disappointed, he readily
agreed to the delay, believing, agreeably to the proverb, that delay
would greatly enhance the sweetness of those pleasures which were in
store for him.

It is scarcely necessary to say that the princess spent her days and
her nights in sorrowing and sighing. She lamented that idle curiosity
which had led her to come to the upper world, leaving her husband
below. When she recollected that her husband was all alone below the
waters she wept bitter tears. She wished she could run away. But that
was impossible, as she was immured within walls, and there were walls
within walls. Besides, if she could get out of the palace and of the
city, of what avail would it be? She could not gain her husband,
as the serpent jewel was not in her possession. The ladies of the
palace and Phakir's mother tried to divert her mind, but in vain. She
took pleasure in nothing; she would hardly speak to any one; she wept
day and night. The year of her vow was drawing to a close, and yet
she was disconsolate. The marriage, however, must be celebrated. The
Rajah consulted the astrologers, and the day and the hour in which
the nuptial knot was to be tied were fixed. Great preparations were
made. The confectioners of the city busied themselves day and night
in preparing sweetmeats; milkmen took contracts for supplying the
palace with tanks of curds; gunpowder was being manufactured for a
grand display of fireworks; bands of musicians were placed on sheds
erected over the palace gate, who ever and anon sent forth many
"a bout of linked sweetness"; and the whole city assumed an air of
mirth and festivity.

It is time we should think of the minister's son, who, leaving his
friend in the subterranean palace, had gone to his country to bring
horses, elephants, and attendants for the return of the king's son
and his lovely princess with due pomp. The preparations took him
many months; and when everything was ready he started on his journey,
accompanied by a long train of elephants, horses, and attendants. He
reached the tank two or three days before the appointed day. Tents were
pitched in the mango-topes adjoining the tank for the accommodation of
men and cattle; and the minister's son always kept his eyes fixed on
the tank. The sun of the appointed day sank below the horizon; but the
prince and the princess dwelling beneath the waters made no sign. He
waited two or three days longer; still the prince did not make his
appearance. What could have happened to his friend and his beautiful
wife? Were they dead? Had another serpent, possibly the mate of the one
that had died, beaten the prince and the princess to death? Had they
somehow lost the serpent-jewel? Or had they been captured when they
were once on a visit to the upper world? Such were the reflections of
the minister's son. He was overwhelmed with grief. Ever since he had
come to the tank he had heard at regular intervals the sound of music
coming from the city which was not distant. He inquired of passers-by
what that music meant. He was told that the Rajah's son was about
to be married to some wonderful young lady, who had come out of the
waters of that very tank on the bank of which he was now seated, and
that the marriage ceremony was to be performed on the day following
the next. The minister's son immediately concluded that the wonderful
young lady of the lake that was to be married was none other than the
wife of his friend, the king's son. He resolved therefore to go into
the city to learn the details of the affair, and try if possible to
rescue the princess. He told the attendants to go home, taking with
them the elephants and the horses; and he himself went to the city,
and took up his abode in the house of a Brahman.

After he had rested and taken his dinner, the minister's son asked
the Brahman what the meaning was of the music that was heard in the
city at regular intervals. The Brahman asked, "From what part of
the world have you come that you have not heard of the wonderful
circumstance that a young lady of heavenly beauty rose out of the
waters of a tank in the suburbs, and that she is going to be married
the day after to-morrow to the son of our Rajah?"

Minister's Son. No, I have heard nothing. I have come from a distant
country whither the story has not reached. Will you kindly tell me
the particulars?

Brahman. The Rajah's son went out a-hunting about this time last
year. He pitched his tents close to a tank in the suburbs. One day,
while the Rajah's son was walking near the tank, he saw a young
woman, or rather goddess, of uncommon beauty rise from the waters of
the tank. She gazed about for a minute or two and disappeared. The
Rajah's son, however, who had seen her, was so struck with her heavenly
beauty that he became desperately enamoured of her. Indeed, so intense
was his passion, that his reason gave way; and he was carried home
hopelessly mad. The only words he uttered day and night were--"Now
here, now gone!" The Rajah sent for all the best physicians of the
country for restoring his son to his reason; but the physicians were
powerless. At last he caused a proclamation to be made by beat of drum
to the effect that if any one could cure the Rajah's son, he should
be the Rajah's son-in-law and the owner of half his kingdom. An old
woman, who went by the name of Phakir's mother, took hold of the drum,
and declared her ability to cure the Rajah's son. On the tank where
the princess had appeared was raised for Phakir's mother a hut in
which she took up her abode; and not far from her hut another hut was
erected for the accommodation of attendants who might be required to
help her. It seems the goddess rose from the waters; Phakir's mother
seized her with the help of the attendants, and carried her in a palki
to the palace. At the sight of her the Rajah's son was restored to
his senses; and the marriage would have been celebrated at that time
but for a vow which the goddess had made that she would not look at
the face of any male person till the lapse of a year. The year of the
vow is now over; and the music which you have heard is from the gate
of the Rajah's palace. This, in brief, is the story.

Minister's Son. A truly wonderful story! And has Phakir's mother,
or rather Phakir Chand himself, been rewarded with the hand of the
Rajah's daughter and with the possession of half the kingdom?

Brahman. No, not yet. Phakir has not been got hold of. He is a
half-witted lad, or rather quite mad. He has been away for more
than a year from his home, and no one knows where he is. That is his
manner; he stays away for a long time, suddenly comes home, and again
disappears. I believe his mother expects him soon.

Minister's Son. What like is he? and what does he do when he returns
home?

Brahman. Why, he is about your height, though he is somewhat younger
than you. He puts on a small piece of cloth round his waist, rubs
his body with ashes, takes the branch of a tree in his hand, and,
at the door of the hut in which his mother lives, dances to the tune
of dhoop! dhoop! dhoop! His articulation is very indistinct; and when
his mother says--"Phakir! stay with me for some days," he invariably
answers in his usual unintelligible manner, "No, I won't remain,
I won't remain." And when he wishes to give an affirmative answer,
he says, "Hoom," which means "Yes."

The above conversation with the Brahman poured a flood of light into
the mind of the minister's son. He saw how matters stood. He perceived
that the princess of the subterranean palace must have alone ventured
out into the tank by means of the snake-jewel; that she must have
been captured alone without the king's son; that the snake-jewel
must be in the possession of Phakir's mother; and that his friend,
the king's son, must be alone below the waters without any means of
escape. The desolate and apparently hopeless state of his friend
filled him with unutterable grief. He was in deep musings during
most part of the night. Is it impossible, thought he, to rescue the
king's son from the nether regions? What if, by some means or other,
I contrive to get the jewel from the old woman? And can I not do it
by personating Phakir Chand himself, who is expected by his mother
shortly? And possibly by the same means I may be able to rescue the
princess from the Rajah's palace. He resolved to act the role of Phakir
Chand the following day. In the morning he left the Brahman's house,
went to the outskirts of the city, divested himself of his usual
clothing, put round his waist a short and narrow piece of cloth which
scarcely reached his knee-joints, rubbed his body well with ashes,
took in his hand a twig which he broke off a tree, and thus accoutred,
presented himself before the door of the hut of Phakir's mother. He
commenced operations by dancing, in a most violent manner, to the
tune of dhoop! dhoop! dhoop! The dancing attracted the notice of the
old woman, who, supposing that her son had come, said--"My son Phakir,
are you come? Come, my darling; the gods have at last become propitious
to us." The supposed Phakir Chand uttered the monosyllable "hoom," and
went on dancing in a still more violent manner than before, waving the
twig in his hand. "This time you must not go away," said the old woman,
"you must remain with me." "No, I won't remain, I won't remain," said
the minister's son. "Remain with me, and I'll get you married to the
Rajah's daughter. Will you marry, Phakir Chand?" The minister's son
replied--"Hoom, hoom," and danced on like a madman. "Will you come
with me to the Rajah's house? I'll show you a princess of uncommon
beauty who has risen from the waters." "Hoom, hoom," was the answer
that issued from his lips, while his feet tripped it violently to
the sound of dhoop! dhoop! "Do you wish to see a manik, Phakir, the
crest jewel of the serpent, the treasure of seven kings?" "Hoom,
hoom," was the reply. The old woman brought out of the hut the
snake-jewel, and put it into the hand of her supposed son. The
minister's son took it, and carefully wrapped it up in the piece
of cloth round his waist. Phakir's mother, delighted beyond measure
at the opportune appearance of her son, went to the Rajah's house,
partly to announce to the Rajah the news of Phakir's appearance,
and partly to show Phakir the princess of the waters. The supposed
Phakir and his mother found ready access to the Rajah's palace, for
the old woman had, since the capture of the princess, become the most
important person in the kingdom. She took him into the room where the
princess was, and introduced him to her. It is superfluous to remark
that the princess was by no means pleased with the company of a madcap,
who was in a state of semi-nudity, whose body was rubbed with ashes,
and who was ever and anon dancing in a wild manner. At sunset the old
woman proposed to her son that they should leave the palace and go
to their own house. But the supposed Phakir Chand refused to comply
with the request; he said he would stay there that night. His mother
tried to persuade him to return with her, but he persisted in his
determination. He said he would remain with the princess. Phakir's
mother therefore went away, after giving instructions to the guards
and attendants to take care of her son.

When all in the palace had retired to rest, the supposed Phakir, coming
towards the princess, said in his own usual voice--"Princess! do you
not recognise me? I am the minister's son, the friend of your princely
husband." The princess, astonished at the announcement, said--"Who? The
minister's son? Oh, my husband's best friend, do rescue me from this
terrible captivity, from this worse than death. O fate! it is by my
own fault that I am reduced to this wretched state. Oh, rescue me,
rescue me, thou best of friends!" She then burst into tears. The
minister's son said, "Do not be disconsolate. I will try my best
to rescue you this very night; only you must do whatever I tell
you." "I will do anything you tell me, minister's son; anything you
tell me." After this the supposed Phakir left the room, and passed
through the courtyard of the palace. Some of the guards challenged
him, to whom he replied, "Hoom, hoom; I will just go out for a
minute and again come in presently." They understood that it was
the madcap Phakir. True to his word he did come back shortly, and
went to the princess. An hour afterwards he again went out and was
again challenged, on which he made the same reply as at the first
time. The guards who challenged him began to mutter between their
teeth--"This madcap of a Phakir will, we suppose, go out and come in
all night. Let the fellow alone; let him do what he likes. Who can
be sitting up all night for him?" The minister's son was going out
and coming in with the view of accustoming the guards to his constant
egress and ingress, and also of watching for a favourable opportunity
to escape with the princess. About three o'clock in the morning the
minister's son again passed through the courtyard, but this time no
one challenged him, as all the guards had fallen asleep. Overjoyed at
the auspicious circumstance, he went to the princess. "Now, princess,
is the time for escape. The guards are all asleep. Mount on my back,
and tie the locks of your hair round my neck, and keep tight hold
of me." The princess did as she was told. He passed unchallenged
through the courtyard with the lovely burden on his back, passed out
of the gate of the palace--no one challenging him, passed on to the
outskirts of the city, and reached the tank from which the princess
had risen. The princess stood on her legs, rejoicing at her escape, and
at the same time trembling. The minister's son untied the snake-jewel
from his waist-cloth, and descending into the waters, both he and she
found their way to the subterranean palace. The reception which the
prince in the subaqueous palace gave to his wife and his friend may be
easily imagined. He had nearly died of grief; but now he suffered a
resurrection. The three were now mad with joy. During the three days
that they remained in the palace they again and again told the story
of the egress of the princess into the upper world, of her seizure,
of her captivity in the palace, of the preparations for marriage, of
the old woman, of the minister's son personating Phakir Chand, and of
the successful deliverance. It is unnecessary to add that the prince
and the princess expressed their gratitude to the minister's son in
the warmest terms, declared him to be their best and greatest friend,
and vowed to abide always, till the day of their death, by his advice,
and to follow his counsel.

Being resolved to return to their native country, the king's son,
the minister's son, and the princess left the subterranean palace,
and, lighted in the passage by the snake-jewel, made their way good to
the upper world. As they had neither elephants nor horses, they were
under the necessity of travelling on foot; and though this mode of
travelling was troublesome to both the king's son and the minister's
son, as they were bred in the lap of luxury, it was infinitely more
troublesome to the princess, as the stones of the rough road


                        "Wounded the invisible
        Palms of her tender feet where'er they fell."


When her feet became very sore, the king's son sometimes took her
up on his broad shoulders, on which she sat astride; but the load,
however lovely, was too heavy to be carried any great distance. She
therefore, for the most part, travelled on foot.

One evening they bivouacked beneath a tree, as no human habitations
were visible. The minister's son said to the prince and princess,
"Both of you go to sleep, and I will keep watch in order to prevent any
danger." The royal couple were soon locked in the arms of sleep. The
faithful son of the minister did not sleep, but sat up watching. It so
happened that on that tree swung the nest of the two immortal birds,
Bihangama and Bihangami, who were not only endowed with the power
of human speech, but who could see into the future. To the no little
astonishment of the minister's son the two prophetical birds joined
in the following conversation:--

Bihangama. The minister's son has already risked his own life for the
safety of his friend, the king's son; but he will find it difficult
to save the prince at last.

Bihangami. Why so?

Bihangama. Many dangers await the king's son. The prince's father, when
he hears of the approach of his son, will send for him an elephant,
some horses, and attendants. When the king's son rides on the elephant
he will fall down and die.

Bihangami. But suppose some one prevents the king's son from riding
on the elephant, and makes him ride on horseback, will he not in that
case be saved?

Bihangama. Yes, he will in that case escape that danger, but a fresh
danger awaits him. When the king's son is in sight of his father's
palace, and when he is in the act of passing through its lion-gate,
the lion-gate will fall upon him and crush him to death.

Bihangami. But suppose some one destroys the lion-gate before the
king's son goes up to it; will not the king's son in that case
be saved?

Bihangama. Yes, in that case he will escape that particular danger;
but a fresh danger awaits him. When the king's son reaches the palace
and sits at a feast prepared for him, and when he takes into his
mouth the head of a fish cooked for him, the head of the fish will
stick in his throat and choke him to death.

Bihangami. But suppose some one sitting at the feast snatches the head
of the fish from the prince's plate, and thus prevents him from putting
it into his mouth, will not the king's son in that case be saved?

Bihangama. Yes, in that case he will escape that particular danger;
but a fresh danger awaits him. When the prince and princess after
dinner retire into their sleeping apartment, and they lie together
in bed, a terrible cobra will come into the room and bite the king's
son to death.

Bihangami. But suppose some one lying in wait in the room cut the
snake into pieces, will not the king's son in that case be saved?

Bihangama. Yes, in that case the life of the king's son will be
saved; but if the man who kills the snake repeats to the king's son
the conversation between you and me, that man will be turned into a
marble statue.

Bihangami. But is there no means of restoring the marble statue
to life?

Bihangama. Yes, the marble statue may be restored to life if it is
washed with the life-blood of the infant which the princess will give
birth to, immediately after it is ushered into the world.

The conversation of the prophetical birds had extended thus far
when the crows began to caw, the east put on a reddish hue, and the
travellers beneath the tree bestirred themselves. The conversation
stopped, but the minister's son had heard it all.

The prince, the princess, and the minister's son pursued their journey
in the morning; but they had not walked many hours when they met a
procession consisting of an elephant, a horse, a palki, and a large
number of attendants. These animals and men had been sent by the king,
who had heard that his son, together with his newly married wife and
his friend the minister's son, were not far from the capital on their
journey homewards. The elephant, which was richly caparisoned, was
intended for the prince; the palki the framework of which was silver
and was gaudily adorned, was meant for the princess; and the horse for
the minister's son. As the prince was about to mount on the elephant,
the minister's son went up to him and said--"Allow me to ride on
the elephant, and you please ride on horseback." The prince was not
a little surprised at the coolness of the proposal. He thought his
friend was presuming too much on the services he had rendered; he was
therefore nettled, but remembering that his friend had saved both him
and his wife, he said nothing, but quietly mounted the horse, though
his mind became somewhat alienated from him. The procession started,
and after some time came in sight of the palace, the lion-gate of
which had been gaily adorned for the reception of the prince and
the princess. The minister's son told the prince that the lion-gate
should be broken down before the prince could enter the palace. The
prince was astounded at the proposal, especially as the minister's
son gave no reasons for so extraordinary a request. His mind became
still more estranged from him; but in consideration of the services
the minister's son had rendered, his request was complied with,
and the beautiful lion-gate, with its gay decorations, was broken down.

The party now went into the palace, where the king gave a warm
reception to his son, to his daughter-in-law, and to the minister's
son. When the story of their adventures was related, the king and his
courtiers expressed great astonishment, and they all with one voice
extolled the sagacity, prudence, and devotedness of the minister's
son. The ladies of the palace were struck with the extraordinary
beauty of the new-comer; her complexion was milk and vermilion mixed
together; her neck was like that of a swan; her eyes were like those
of a gazelle; her lips were as red as the berry bimba; her cheeks were
lovely; her nose was straight and high; her hair reached her ankles;
her walk was as graceful as that of a young elephant--such were the
terms in which the connoisseurs of beauty praised the princess whom
destiny had brought into the midst of them. They sat around her and
put her a thousand questions regarding her parents, regarding the
subterranean palace in which she formerly lived, and the serpent
which had killed all her relatives. It was now time that the new
arrivals should have their dinner. The dinner was served up in dishes
of gold. All sorts of delicacies were there, amongst which the most
conspicuous was the large head of a rohita fish placed in a golden
cup near the prince's plate. While they were eating, the minister's
son suddenly snatched the head of the fish from the prince's plate,
and said, "Let me, prince, eat this rohita's head." The king's son was
quite indignant. He said nothing, however. The minister's son perceived
that his friend was in a terrible rage; but he could not help it,
as his conduct, however strange, was necessary to the safety of his
friend's life; neither could he clear himself by stating the reason of
his behaviour, as in that case he himself would be transformed into
a marble statue. The dinner over, the minister's son expressed his
desire to go to his own house. At other times the king's son would
not allow his friend to go away in that fashion; but being shocked at
his strange conduct, he readily agreed to the proposal. The minister's
son, however, had not the slightest notion of going to his own house;
he was resolved to avert the last peril that was to threaten the life
of his friend. Accordingly, with a sword in his hand, he stealthily
entered the room in which the prince and the princess were to sleep
that night, and ensconced himself under the bedstead, which was
furnished with mattresses of down and canopied with mosquito curtains
of the richest silk and gold lace. Soon after dinner the prince and
princess came into the bedroom, and undressing themselves went to
bed. At midnight, while the royal couple were asleep, the minister's
son perceived a snake of gigantic size enter the room through one of
the water-passages, and climb up the tester-frame of the bed. He rushed
out of his hiding-place, killed the serpent, cut it up in pieces, and
put the pieces in the dish for holding betel-leaves and spices. It so
happened, however, that as the minister's son was cutting the serpent
into pieces, a drop of blood fell on the breast of the princess, and
the rather as the mosquito curtains had not been let down. Thinking
that the drop of blood might injure the fair princess, he resolved
to lick it up. But as he regarded it as a great sin to look upon a
young woman lying asleep half naked, he blindfolded himself with
seven-fold cloth, and licked up the drop of blood. But while he
was in the act of licking it, the princess awoke and screamed, and
her scream roused her husband lying beside her. The prince seeing
the minister's son, who he thought had gone away to his own house,
bending over the body of his wife, fell into a great rage, and would
have got up and killed him, had not the minister's son besought him
to restrain his anger, adding--"Friend, I have done this only in
order to save your life." "I do not understand what you mean," said
the prince; "ever since we came out of the subterranean palace you
have been behaving in a most extraordinary way. In the first place,
you prevented me from getting upon the richly caparisoned elephant,
though my father, the king, had purposely sent it for me. I thought,
however, that a sense of the services you had rendered to me had made
you exceedingly vain; I therefore let the matter pass, and mounted
the horse. In the second place, you insisted on the destruction of the
fine lion-gate, which my father had adorned with gay decorations; and
I let that matter also pass. Then, again, at dinner you snatched away,
in a most shameful manner, the rohita's head which was on my plate,
and devoured it yourself, thinking, no doubt, that you were entitled
to higher honours than I. You then pretended that you were going
home, for which I was not at all sorry, as you had made yourself
very disagreeable to me. And now you are actually in my bedroom,
bending over the naked bosom of my wife. You must have had some evil
design; and you pretend that you have done this to save my life. I
fancy it was not for saving my life, but for destroying my wife's
chastity." "Oh, do not harbour such thoughts in your mind against
me. The gods know that I have done all this for the preservation of
your life. You would see the reasonableness of my conduct throughout
if I had the liberty of stating my reasons." "And why are you not
at liberty?" asked the prince; "who has shut up your mouth?" "It is
destiny that has shut up my mouth," answered the minister's son;
"if I were to tell it all, I should be transformed into a marble
statue." "You would be transformed into a marble statue!" exclaimed
the prince; "you must take me to be a simpleton to believe this
nonsense." "Do you wish me then, friend," said the minister's son,
"to tell you all? You must then make up your mind to see your friend
turned into stone." "Come, out with it," said the prince, "or else you
are a dead man." The minister's son, in order to clear himself of the
foul accusation brought against him, deemed it his duty to reveal the
secret at the risk of his life. He again and again warned the prince
not to press him. But the prince remained inexorable. The minister's
son then went on to say that, while bivouacking under a lofty tree
one night, he had overheard a conversation between Bihangama and
Bihangami, in which the former predicted all the dangers that were to
threaten the life of the prince. When the minister's son had related
the prediction concerning the mounting upon the elephant, his lower
parts were turned into stone. He then, turning to the prince, said,
"See, friend, my lower parts have already turned into stone." "Go on,
go on," said the prince, "with your story." The minister's son then
related the prophecy regarding the destruction of the lion-gate,
when half of his body was converted into stone. He then related
the prediction regarding the eating of the head of the fish, when
his body up to his neck was petrified. "Now, friend," said the
minister's son, "the whole of my body, excepting my neck and head,
is petrified; if I tell the rest, I shall assuredly become a man of
stone. Do you wish me still to go on?" "Go on," answered the prince,
"go on." "Very well, I will go on to the end," said the minister's
son; "but in case you repent after I have become turned into stone,
and wish me to be restored to life, I will tell you of the manner
in which it may be effected. The princess after a few months will be
delivered of a child; if immediately after the birth of the infant you
kill it and besmear my marble body with its blood, I shall be restored
to life." He then related the prediction regarding the serpent in the
bedroom; and when the last word was on his lips the rest of his body
was turned into stone, and he dropped on the floor a marble image. The
princess jumped out of bed, opened the vessel for betel-leaves and
spices, and saw there pieces of a serpent. Both the prince and the
princess now became convinced of the good faith and benevolence of
their departed friend. They went to the marble figure, but it was
lifeless. They set up a loud lamentation; but it was to no purpose,
for the marble moved not. They then resolved to keep the marble figure
concealed in a safe place, and to besmear it with the blood of their
first-born child when it should be ushered into existence.

In process of time the hour of the princess's travail came on,
and she was delivered of a beautiful boy, the perfect image of his
mother. Both father and mother were struck with the beauty of their
child, and would fain have spared its life; but recollecting the vows
they had made on behalf of their best friend, now lying in a corner of
the room a lifeless stone, and the inestimable services he had rendered
to both of them, they cut the child into two, and besmeared the marble
figure of the minister's son with its blood. The marble became animated
in a moment. The minister's son stood before the prince and princess,
who became exceedingly glad to see their old friend again in life. But
the minister's son, who saw the lovely new-born babe lying in a pool
of blood, was overwhelmed with grief. He took up the dead infant,
carefully wrapped it up in a towel, and resolved to get it restored
to life.

The minister's son, intent on the reanimation of his friend's child,
consulted all the physicians of the country; but they said that
they would undertake to cure any person of any disease so long as
life was in him, but when life was extinct, the case was beyond
their jurisdiction. The minister's son at last bethought himself
of his own wife, who was living in a distant town, and who was a
devoted worshipper of the goddess Kali, who, through his wife's
intercession, might be prevailed upon to give life to the dead
child. He, accordingly, set out on a journey to the town in which
his wife was living in her father's house. Adjoining that house there
was a garden where upon a tree he hung the dead child wrapped up in
a towel. His wife was overjoyed to see her husband after so long a
time; but to her surprise she found that he was very melancholy, that
he spoke very little, and that he was brooding over something in his
mind. She asked the reason of his melancholy, but he kept quiet. One
night while they were lying together in bed, the wife got up and
opening the door went out. The husband, who had little sleep any night
in consequence of the weight of anxiety regarding the reanimation of
his friend's child, perceiving his wife go out at that dead hour of
night, determined to follow her without being noticed. She went to a
temple of the goddess Kali, which was at no great distance from her
house. She worshipped the goddess with flowers and sandal-wood perfume,
and said, "O mother Kali! have mercy upon me, and deliver me out of
all my troubles." The goddess replied, "Why, what further grievance
have you? You long prayed for the return of your husband, and he has
returned; what aileth thee now?" The woman answered, "True, O Mother,
my husband has come to me, but he is very moody and melancholy,
hardly speaks to me, takes no delight in me, only sits moping in a
corner." To which the goddess rejoined, "Ask your husband what the
reason of his melancholy is, and let me know it." The minister's son
overheard the conversation between the goddess and his wife, but he
did not make his appearance; he quietly slunk away before his wife
and went to bed. The following day the wife asked her husband of the
cause of his melancholy; and he related all the particulars regarding
the killing of the infant child of the prince. Next night at the same
dead hour the wife proceeded to Kali's temple and mentioned to the
goddess the reason of her husband's melancholy; on which the goddess
said, "Bring the child here and I will restore it to life." On the
succeeding night the child was produced before the goddess Kali,
and she called it back to life. Entranced with joy, the minister's
son took up the reanimated child, went as fast as his legs could
carry him to the prince and princess, and presented to them their
child alive and well. They all rejoiced with exceeding great joy,
and lived together happily till the day of their death.


            Thus my story endeth,
            The Natiya-thorn withereth, etc.







III

THE INDIGENT BRAHMAN


There was a Brahman who had a wife and four children. He was
very poor. With no resources in the world, he lived chiefly on the
benefactions of the rich. His gains were considerable when marriages
were celebrated or funeral ceremonies were performed; but as his
parishioners did not marry every day, neither did they die every
day, he found it difficult to make the two ends meet. His wife
often rebuked him for his inability to give her adequate support,
and his children often went about naked and hungry. But though poor
he was a good man. He was diligent in his devotions; and there was
not a single day in his life in which he did not say his prayers at
stated hours. His tutelary deity was the goddess Durga, the consort
of Siva, the creative Energy of the Universe. On no day did he either
drink water or taste food till he had written in red ink the name
of Durga at least one hundred and eight times; while throughout the
day he incessantly uttered the ejaculation, "O Durga! O Durga! have
mercy upon me." Whenever he felt anxious on account of his poverty
and his inability to support his wife and children, he groaned
out--"Durga! Durga! Durga!"

One day, being very sad, he went to a forest many miles distant
from the village in which he lived, and indulging his grief wept
bitter tears. He prayed in the following manner:--"O Durga! O Mother
Bhagavati! wilt thou not make an end of my misery? Were I alone in
the world, I should not have been sad on account of poverty; but thou
hast given me a wife and children. Give me, O Mother, the means to
support them." It so happened that on that day and on that very spot
the god Siva and his wife Durga were taking their morning walk. The
goddess Durga, on seeing the Brahman at a distance, said to her divine
husband--"O Lord of Kailas! do you see that Brahman? He is always
taking my name on his lips and offering the prayer that I should
deliver him out of his troubles. Can we not, my lord, do something
for the poor Brahman, oppressed as he is with the cares of a growing
family? We should give him enough to make him comfortable. As the
poor man and his family have never enough to eat, I propose that you
give him a handi [7] which should yield him an inexhaustible supply
of mudki." [8] The lord of Kailas readily agreed to the proposal of
his divine consort, and by his decree created on the spot a handi
possessing the required quality. Durga then, calling the Brahman
to her, said,--"O Brahman! I have often thought of your pitiable
case. Your repeated prayers have at last moved my compassion. Here is
a handi for you. When you turn it upside down and shake it, it will
pour down a never-ceasing shower of the finest mudki, which will not
end till you restore the handi to its proper position. Yourself,
your wife, and your children can eat as much mudki as you like,
and you can also sell as much as you like." The Brahman, delighted
beyond measure at obtaining so inestimable a treasure, made obeisance
to the goddess, and, taking the handi in his hand, proceeded towards
his house as fast as his legs could carry him. But he had not gone
many yards when he thought of testing the efficacy of the wonderful
vessel. Accordingly he turned the handi upside down and shook it, when,
lo, and behold! a quantity of the finest mudki he had ever seen fell
to the ground. He tied the sweetmeat in his sheet and walked on. It
was now noon, and the Brahman was hungry; but he could not eat without
his ablutions and his prayers. As he saw in the way an inn, and not
far from it a tank, he purposed to halt there that he might bathe,
say his prayers, and then eat the much-desired mudki. The Brahman
sat at the innkeeper's shop, put the handi near him, smoked tobacco,
besmeared his body with mustard oil, and before proceeding to bathe
in the adjacent tank gave the handi in charge to the innkeeper,
begging him again and again to take especial care of it.

When the Brahman went to his bath and his devotions, the innkeeper
thought it strange that he should be so careful as to the safety of
his earthen vessel. There must be something valuable in the handi,
he thought, otherwise why should the Brahman take so much thought
about it? His curiosity being excited he opened the handi, and to his
surprise found that it contained nothing. What can be the meaning of
this? thought the innkeeper within himself. Why should the Brahman
care so much for an empty handi? He took up the vessel, and began
to examine it carefully; and when, in the course of examination, he
turned the handi upside down, a quantity of the finest mudki fell
from it, and went on falling without intermission. The innkeeper
called his wife and children to witness this unexpected stroke of good
fortune. The showers of the sugared fried paddy were so copious that
they filled all the vessels and jars of the innkeeper. He resolved
to appropriate to himself this precious handi, and accordingly put in
its place another handi of the same size and make. The ablutions and
devotions of the Brahman being now over, he came to the shop in wet
clothes reciting holy texts of the Vedas. Putting on dry clothes,
he wrote on a sheet of paper the name of Durga one hundred and
eight times in red ink; after which he broke his fast on the mudki
his handi had already given him. Thus refreshed, and being about
to resume his journey homewards, he called for his handi, which the
innkeeper delivered to him, adding--"There, sir, is your handi; it is
just where you put it; no one has touched it." The Brahman, without
suspecting anything, took up the handi and proceeded on his journey;
and as he walked on, he congratulated himself on his singular good
fortune. "How agreeably," he thought within himself, "will my poor
wife be surprised! How greedily the children will devour the mudki
of heaven's own manufacture! I shall soon become rich, and lift up
my head with the best of them all." The pains of travelling were
considerably alleviated by these joyful anticipations. He reached his
house, and calling his wife and children, said--"Look now at what I
have brought. This handi that you see is an unfailing source of wealth
and contentment. You will see what a stream of the finest mudki will
flow from it when I turn it upside down." The Brahman's good wife,
hearing of mudki falling from the handi unceasingly, thought that her
husband must have gone mad; and she was confirmed in her opinion when
she found that nothing fell from the vessel though it was turned upside
down again and again. Overwhelmed with grief, the Brahman concluded
that the innkeeper must have played a trick with him; he must have
stolen the handi Durga had given him, and put a common one in its
stead. He went back the next day to the innkeeper, and charged him
with having changed his handi. The innkeeper put on a fit of anger,
expressed surprise at the Brahman's impudence in charging him with
theft, and drove him away from his shop.

The Brahman then bethought himself of an interview with the goddess
Durga who had given him the handi, and accordingly went to the forest
where he had met her. Siva and Durga again favoured the Brahman
with an interview. Durga said--"So, you have lost the handi I gave
you. Here is another, take it and make good use of it." The Brahman,
elated with joy, made obeisance to the divine couple, took up the
vessel, and went on his way. He had not gone far when he turned it
upside down, and shook it in order to see whether any mudki would
fall from it. Horror of horrors! instead of sweetmeats about a score
of demons, of gigantic size and grim visage, jumped out of the handi,
and began to belabour the astonished Brahman with blows, fisticuffs and
kicks. He had the presence of mind to turn up the handi and to cover
it, when the demons forthwith disappeared. He concluded that this new
handi had been given him only for the punishment of the innkeeper. He
accordingly went to the innkeeper, gave him the new handi in charge,
begged of him carefully to keep it till he returned from his ablutions
and prayers. The innkeeper, delighted with this second godsend, called
his wife and children, and said--"This is another handi brought here by
the same Brahman who brought the handi of mudki. This time, I hope, it
is not mudki but sandesa. [9] Come, be ready with baskets and vessels,
and I'll turn the handi upside down and shake it." This was no sooner
done than scores of fierce demons started up, who caught hold of the
innkeeper and his family and belaboured them mercilessly. They also
began upsetting the shop, and would have completely destroyed it,
if the victims had not besought the Brahman, who had by this time
returned from his ablutions, to show mercy to them and send away
the terrible demons. The Brahman acceded to the innkeeper's request,
he dismissed the demons by shutting up the vessel; he got the former
handi, and with the two handis went to his native village.

On reaching home the Brahman shut the door of his house, turned the
mudki-handi upside down, and shook it; the result was an unceasing
stream of the finest mudki that any confectioner in the country
could produce. The man, his wife, and their children devoured the
sweetmeat to their hearts' content; all the available earthen pots
and pans of the house were filled with it; and the Brahman resolved
the next day to turn confectioner, to open a shop in his house, and
sell mudki. On the very day the shop was opened, the whole village
came to the Brahman's house to buy the wonderful mudki. They had never
seen such mudki in their life, it was so sweet, so white, so large, so
luscious; no confectioner in the village or any town in the country had
ever manufactured anything like it. The reputation of the Brahman's
mudki extended, in a few days, beyond the bounds of the village,
and people came from remote parts to purchase it. Cartloads of the
sweetmeat were sold every day, and the Brahman in a short time became
very rich. He built a large brick house, and lived like a nobleman
of the land. Once, however, his property was about to go to wreck
and ruin. His children one day by mistake shook the wrong handi,
when a large number of demons dropped down and caught hold of the
Brahman's wife and children and were striking them mercilessly, when
happily the Brahman came into the house and turned up the handi. In
order to prevent a similar catastrophe in future, the Brahman shut up
the demon-handi in a private room to which his children had no access.

Pure and uninterrupted prosperity, however, is not the lot of mortals;
and though the demon-handi was put aside, what security was there
that an accident might not befall the mudki-handi? One day, during
the absence of the Brahman and his wife from the house, the children
decided upon shaking the handi; but as each of them wished to enjoy
the pleasure of shaking it there was a general struggle to get it, and
in the melee the handi fell to the ground and broke. It is needless to
say that the Brahman, when on reaching home he heard of the disaster,
became inexpressibly sad. The children were of course well cudgelled,
but no flogging of children could replace the magical handi. After some
days he again went to the forest, and offered many a prayer for Durga's
favour. At last Siva and Durga again appeared to him, and heard how
the handi had been broken. Durga gave him another handi, accompanied
with the following caution--"Brahman, take care of this handi; if you
again break it or lose it, I'll not give you another." The Brahman
made obeisance, and went away to his house at one stretch without
halting anywhere. On reaching home he shut the door of his house,
called his wife to him, turned the handi upside down, and began to
shake it. They were only expecting mudki to drop from it, but instead
of mudki a perennial stream of beautiful sandesa issued from it. And
such sandesa! No confectioner of Burra Bazar ever made its like. It
was more the food of gods than of men. The Brahman forthwith set up
a shop for selling sandesa, the fame of which soon drew crowds of
customers from all parts of the country. At all festivals, at all
marriage feasts, at all funeral celebrations, at all Pujas, no one
bought any other sandesa than the Brahman's. Every day, and every
hour, many jars of gigantic size, filled with the delicious sweetmeat,
were sent to all parts of the country.

The wealth of the Brahman excited the envy of the Zemindar of the
village, who, having heard that the sandesa was not manufactured but
dropped from a handi, devised a plan for getting possession of the
miraculous vessel. At the celebration of his son's marriage he held
a great feast, to which were invited hundreds of people. As many
mountain-loads of sandesa would be required for the purpose, the
Zemindar proposed that the Brahman should bring the magical handi to
the house in which the feast was held. The Brahman at first refused
to take it there; but as the Zemindar insisted on its being carried
to his own house, he reluctantly consented to take it there. After
many Himalayas of sandesa had been shaken out, the handi was taken
possession of by the Zemindar, and the Brahman was insulted and driven
out of the house. The Brahman, without giving vent to anger in the
least, quietly went to his house, and taking the demon-handi in his
hand, came back to the door of the Zemindar's house. He turned the
handi upside down and shook it, on which a hundred demons started up
as from the vasty deep and enacted a scene which it is impossible to
describe. The hundreds of guests that had been bidden to the feast
were caught hold of by the unearthly visitants and beaten; the women
were dragged by their hair from the Zenana and dashed about amongst
the men; while the big and burly Zemindar was driven about from room
to room like a bale of cotton. If the demons had been allowed to do
their will only for a few minutes longer, all the men would have been
killed, and the very house razed to the ground. The Zemindar fell
prostrate at the feet of the Brahman and begged for mercy. Mercy was
shown him, and the demons were removed. After that the Brahman was
no more disturbed by the Zemindar or by any one else; and he lived
many years in great happiness and enjoyment.


            Thus my story endeth,
            The Natiya-thorn withereth, etc.







IV

THE STORY OF THE RAKSHASAS


There was a poor half-witted Brahman who had a wife but no children. It
was only with difficulty he could supply the wants of himself and his
wife. And the worst of it was that he was rather lazily inclined. He
was averse to taking long journeys, otherwise he might always have
had enough, in the shape of presents from rich men, to enable him
and his wife to live comfortably. There was at that time a king in a
neighbouring country who was celebrating the funeral obsequies of his
mother with great pomp. Brahmans and beggars were going from different
parts with the expectation of receiving rich presents. Our Brahman was
requested by his wife to seize this opportunity and get a little money;
but his constitutional indolence stood in the way. The woman, however,
gave her husband no rest till she extorted from him the promise that
he would go. The good woman, accordingly, cut down a plantain tree
and burnt it to ashes, with which ashes she cleaned the clothes of
her husband, and made them as white as any fuller could make them. She
did this because her husband was going to the palace of a great king,
who could not be approached by men clothed in dirty rags; besides,
as a Brahman, he was bound to appear neat and clean. The Brahman at
last one morning left his house for the palace of the great king. As
he was somewhat imbecile, he did not inquire of any one which road
he should take; but he went on and on, and proceeded whithersoever
his two eyes directed him. He was of course not on the right road,
indeed he had reached a region where he did not meet with a single
human being for many miles, and where he saw sights which he had
never seen in his life. He saw hillocks of cowries (shells used as
money) on the roadside: he had not proceeded far from them when he
saw hillocks of pice, then successively hillocks of four-anna pieces,
hillocks of eight-anna pieces, and hillocks of rupees. To the infinite
surprise of the poor Brahman, these hillocks of shining silver coins
were succeeded by a large hill of burnished gold-mohurs, which were
all as bright as if they had been just issued from the mint. Close
to this hill of gold-mohurs was a large house which seemed to be
the palace of a powerful and rich king, at the door of which stood
a lady of exquisite beauty. The lady, seeing the Brahman, said,
"Come, my beloved husband; you married me when I was young, and
you never came once after our marriage, though I have been daily
expecting you. Blessed be this day which has made me see the face of
my husband. Come, my sweet, come in, wash your feet and rest after the
fatigues of your journey; eat and drink, and after that we shall make
ourselves merry." The Brahman was astonished beyond measure. He had
no recollection of having been married in early youth to any other
woman than the woman who was now keeping house with him. But being
a Kulin Brahman, he thought it was quite possible that his father
had got him married when he was a little child, though the fact had
made no impression on his mind. But whether he remembered it or not,
the fact was certain, for the woman declared that she was his wedded
wife,--and such a wife! as beautiful as the goddesses of Indra's
heaven, and no doubt as wealthy as she was beautiful. While these
thoughts were passing through the Brahman's mind, the lady said again,
"Are you doubting in your mind whether I am your wife? Is it possible
that all recollection of that happy event has been effaced from your
mind--all the pomp and circumstance of our nuptials? Come in, beloved;
this is your own house, for whatever is mine is thine." The Brahman
succumbed to the loving entreaties of the fair lady, and went into the
house. The house was not an ordinary one--it was a magnificent palace,
all the apartments being large and lofty and richly furnished. But one
thing surprised the Brahman very much, and that was that there was
no other person in the house besides the lady herself. He could not
account for so singular a phenomenon; neither could he explain how
it was that he did not meet with any human being in his morning and
evening walks. The fact was that the lady was not a human being. She
was a Rakshasi. [10] She had eaten up the king, the queen, and all
the members of the royal family, and gradually all his subjects. This
was the reason why human beings were not seen in those parts.

The Rakshasi and the Brahman lived together for about a week, when
the former said to the latter, "I am very anxious to see my sister,
your other wife. You must go and fetch her, and we shall all live
together happily in this large and beautiful house. You must go early
to-morrow, and I will give you clothes and jewels for her." Next
morning the Brahman, furnished with fine clothes and costly ornaments,
set out for his home. The poor woman was in great distress; all the
Brahmans and Pandits that had been to the funeral ceremony of the
king's mother had returned home loaded with largesses; but her husband
had not returned,--and no one could give any news of him, for no one
had seen him there. The woman therefore concluded that he must have
been murdered on the road by highwaymen. She was in this terrible
suspense, when one day she heard a rumour in the village that her
husband was seen coming home with fine clothes and costly jewels for
his wife. And sure enough the Brahman soon appeared with his valuable
load. On seeing his wife the Brahman thus accosted her:--"Come with
me, my dearest wife; I have found my first wife. She lives in a
stately palace, near which are hillocks of rupees and a large hill
of gold-mohurs. Why should you pine away in wretchedness and misery
in this horrible place? Come with me to the house of my first wife,
and we shall all live together happily." When the woman heard her
husband speak of his first wife, of hillocks of rupees and of a hill
of gold-mohurs, she thought in her mind that her half-witted good man
had become quite mad; but when she saw the exquisitely beautiful silks
and satins and the ornaments set with diamonds and precious stones,
which only queens and princesses were in the habit of putting on,
she concluded in her mind that her poor husband had fallen into the
meshes of a Rakshasi. The Brahman, however, insisted on his wife's
going with him, and declared that if she did not come she was at
liberty to pine away in poverty, but that for himself he meant to
return forthwith to his first and rich wife. The good woman, after a
great deal of altercation with her husband, resolved to go with him
and judge for herself how matters stood. They set out accordingly
the next morning, and went by the same road on which the Brahman had
travelled. The woman was not a little surprised to see hillocks of
cowries, of pice, of eight-anna pieces, of rupees, and last of all a
lofty hill of gold-mohurs. She saw also an exceedingly beautiful lady
coming out of the palace hard by, and hastening towards her. The lady
fell on the neck of the Brahman woman, wept tears of joy, and said,
"Welcome, beloved sister! this is the happiest day of my life! I have
seen the face of my dearest sister!" The party then entered the palace.

What with the stately mansion in which he was lodged, with the most
delectable provisions which seemed to rise as if by enchantment, what
with the caresses and endearments of his two wives, the one human and
the other demoniac, who vied with each other in making him happy and
comfortable, the Brahman had a jolly time of it. He was steeped as
it were in an ocean of enjoyment. Some fifteen or sixteen years were
spent by the Brahman in this state of Elysian pleasure, during which
period his two wives presented him with two sons. The Rakshasi's son,
who was the elder, and who looked more like a god than a human being,
was named Sahasra Dal, literally the Thousand-Branched; and the son
of the Brahman woman, who was a year younger, was named Champa Dal,
that is, branch of a champaka tree. The two boys loved each other
dearly. They were both sent to a school which was several miles
distant, to which they used every day to go riding on two little
ponies of extraordinary fleetness.

The Brahman woman had all along suspected from a thousand little
circumstances that her sister-in-law was not a human being but a
Rakshasi; but her suspicion had not yet ripened into certainty, for
the Rakshasi exercised great self-restraint on herself, and never
did anything which human beings did not do. But the demoniac nature,
like murder, will out. The Brahman having nothing to do, in order
to pass his time had recourse to hunting. The first day he returned
from the hunt, he had bagged an antelope. The antelope was laid in the
courtyard of the palace. At the sight of the antelope the mouth of the
raw-eating Rakshasi began to water. Before the animal was dressed for
the kitchen, she took it away into a room, and began devouring it. The
Brahman woman, who was watching the whole scene from a secret place,
saw her Rakshasi sister tear off a leg of the antelope, and opening her
tremendous jaws, which seemed to her imagination to extend from earth
to heaven, swallow it up. In this manner the body and other limbs of
the antelope were devoured, till only a little bit of the meat was
kept for the kitchen. The second day another antelope was bagged,
and the third day another; and the Rakshasi, unable to restrain her
appetite for raw flesh, devoured these two as she had devoured the
first. On the third day the Brahman woman expressed to the Rakshasi her
surprise at the disappearance of nearly the whole of the antelope with
the exception of a little bit. The Rakshasi looked fierce and said,
"Do I eat raw flesh?" To which the Brahman woman replied, "Perhaps you
do, for aught I know to the contrary." The Rakshasi, knowing herself
to be discovered, looked fiercer than before, and vowed revenge. The
Brahman woman concluded in her mind that the doom of herself, of
her husband, and of her son was sealed. She spent a miserable night,
believing that next day she would be killed and eaten up, and that her
husband and son would share the same fate. Early next morning, before
her son Champa Dal went to school, she gave him in a small golden
vessel a little quantity of her own breast milk, and told him to be
constantly watching its colour. "Should you," she said, "see the milk
get a little red, then conclude that your father has been killed; and
should you see it grow still redder, then conclude that I am killed:
when you see this, gallop away for your life as fast as your horse
can carry you, for if you do not, you also will be devoured."

The Rakshasi on getting up from bed--and she had prevented the Brahman
overnight from having any communication with his wife--proposed that
she and the Brahman should go to bathe in the river, which was at
some distance. She would take no denial; the Brahman had therefore
to follow her as meekly as a lamb. The Brahman woman at once saw from
the proposal that ruin was impending; but it was beyond her power to
avert the catastrophe. The Rakshasi, on the river-side, assuming her
own proper gigantic dimensions, took hold of the ill-fated Brahman,
tore him limb by limb, and devoured him up. She then ran to her house,
and seized the Brahman woman, and put her into her capacious stomach,
clothes, hair and all. Young Champa Dal, who, agreeably to his mother's
instructions, was diligently watching the milk in the small golden
vessel, was horror-struck to find the milk redden a little. He set
up a cry and said that his father was killed; a few minutes after,
finding the milk become completely red, he cried yet louder, and
rushing to his pony, mounted it. His half-brother, Sahasra Dal,
surprised at Champa Dal's conduct, said, "Where are you going,
Champa? Why are you crying? Let me accompany you." "Oh! do not come
to me. Your mother has devoured my father and mother; don't you come
and devour me." "I will not devour you; I'll save you." Scarcely
had he uttered these words and galloped away after Champa Dal, when
he saw his mother in her own Rakshasi form appearing at a distance,
and demanding that Champa Dal should come to her. He said, "I will
come to you, not Champa." So saying, he went to his mother, and with
his sword, which he always wore as a young prince, cut off her head.

Champa Dal had, in the meantime, galloped off a good distance, as
he was running for his life; but Sahasra Dal, by pricking his horse
repeatedly, soon overtook him, and told him that his mother was no
more. This was small consolation to Champa Dal, as the Rakshasi,
before being killed, had devoured both his father and mother; still
he could not but feel that Sahasra Dal's friendship was sincere. They
both rode fast, and as their horses were of the breed of pakshirajes
(literally, kings of birds), they travelled over hundreds of miles. An
hour or two before sundown they descried a village, to which they made
up, and became guests in the house of one of its most respectable
inhabitants. The two friends found the members of that respectable
family in deep gloom. Evidently there was something agitating them
very much. Some of them held private consultations, and others were
weeping. The eldest lady of the house, the mother of its head, said
aloud, "Let me go, as I am the eldest. I have lived long enough;
at the utmost my life would be cut short only by a year or two." The
youngest member of the house, who was a little girl, said, "Let me
go, as I am young and useless to the family; if I die I shall not be
missed." The head of the house, the son of the old lady, said, "I am
the head and representative of the family; it is but reasonable that
I should give up my life." His younger brother said, "You are the main
prop and pillar of the family; if you go the whole family is ruined. It
is not reasonable that you should go; let me go, as I shall not be
much missed." The two strangers listened to all this conversation
with no little curiosity. They wondered what it all meant. Sahasra
Dal at last, at the risk of being thought meddlesome, ventured to
ask the head of the house the subject of their consultations, and
the reason of the deep misery but too visible in their countenances
and words. The head of the house gave the following answer: "Know
then, worthy guests, that this part of the country is infested by a
terrible Rakshasi, who has depopulated all the regions round. This
town, too, would have been depopulated, but that our king became a
suppliant before the Rakshasi, and begged her to show mercy to us his
subjects. The Rakshasi replied, 'I will consent to show mercy to you
and to your subjects only on this condition, that you every night put
a human being, either male or female, in a certain temple for me to
feast upon. If I get a human being every night I will rest satisfied,
and not commit any further depredations on your subjects.' Our king
had no other alternative than to agree to this condition, for what
human beings can ever hope to contend against a Rakshasi? From that
day the king made it a rule that every family in the town should in
its turn send one of its members to the temple as a victim to appease
the wrath and to satisfy the hunger of the terrible Rakshasi. All the
families in this neighbourhood have had their turn, and this night
it is the turn for one of us to devote himself to destruction. We are
therefore discussing who should go. You must now perceive the cause of
our distress." The two friends consulted together for a few minutes,
and at the conclusion of their consultations, Sahasra Dal, who was the
spokesman of the party, said, "Most worthy host, do not any longer be
sad: as you have been very kind to us, we have resolved to requite
your hospitality by ourselves going to the temple and becoming the
food of the Rakshasi. We go as your representatives." The whole
family protested against the proposal. They declared that guests
were like gods, and that it was the duty of the host to endure all
sorts of privation for the comfort of the guest, and not the duty of
the guest to suffer for the host. But the two strangers insisted on
standing proxy to the family, who, after a great deal of yea and nay,
at last consented to the arrangement.

Immediately after candle-light, Sahasra Dal and Champa Dal, with
their two horses, installed themselves in the temple, and shut the
door. Sahasra told his brother to go to sleep, as he himself was
determined to sit up the whole night and watch against the coming of
the terrible Rakshasi. Champa was soon in a fine sleep, while Sahasra
lay awake. Nothing happened during the early hours of the night, but
no sooner had the gong of the king's palace announced the dead hour
of midnight than Sahasra heard the sound as of a rushing tempest,
and immediately concluded, from his knowledge of Rakshasas, that
the Rakshasi was nigh. A thundering knock was heard at the door,
accompanied with the following words:--


           "How, mow, khow!
            A human being I smell;
            Who watches inside?"


To this question Sahasra Dal made the following reply:--


           "Sahasra Dal watcheth,
            Champa Dal watcheth,
            Two winged horses watch."


On hearing this answer the Rakshasi turned away with a groan, knowing
that Sahasra Dal had Rakshasa blood in his veins. An hour after,
the Rakshasi returned, thundered at the door, and called out--


           "How, mow, khow!
            A human being I smell;
            Who watcheth inside?"


Sahasra Dal again replied--


           "Sahasra Dal watcheth,
            Champa Dal watcheth,
            Two winged horses watch."


The Rakshasi again groaned and went away. At two o'clock and at three
o'clock the Rakshasi again and again made her appearance, and made
the usual inquiry, and obtaining the same answer, went away with a
groan. After three o'clock, however, Sahasra Dal felt very sleepy:
he could not any longer keep awake. He therefore roused Champa,
told him to watch, and strictly enjoined upon him, in reply to the
query of the Rakshasi, to mention Sahasra's name first. With these
instructions he went to sleep. At four o'clock the Rakshasi again
made her appearance, thundered at the door, and said--


           "How, mow, khow!
            A human being I smell;
            Who watches inside?"


As Champa Dal was in a terrible fright, he forgot the instructions
of his brother for the moment, and answered--


           "Champa Dal watcheth,
            Sahasra Dal watcheth,
            Two winged horses watch."


On hearing this reply the Rakshasi uttered a shout of exultation,
laughed such a laugh as only demons can, and with a dreadful noise
broke open the door. The noise roused Sahasra, who in a moment
sprung to his feet, and with his sword, which was as supple as a
palm-leaf, cut off the head of the Rakshasi. The huge mountain of a
body fell to the ground, making a great noise, and lay covering many
an acre. Sahasra Dal kept the severed head of the Rakshasi near him,
and went to sleep. Early in the morning some wood-cutters, who were
passing near the temple, saw the huge body on the ground. They could
not from a distance make out what it was, but on coming near they
knew that it was the carcase of the terrible Rakshasi, who had by
her voracity nearly depopulated the country. Remembering the promise
made by the king that the killer of the Rakshasi should be rewarded
by the hand of his daughter and with a share of the kingdom, each of
the wood-cutters, seeing no claimant at hand, thought of obtaining
the reward. Accordingly each of them cut off a part of a limb of the
huge carcase, went to the king, and represented himself to be the
destroyer of the great raw-eater, and claimed the reward. The king,
in order to find out the real hero and deliverer, inquired of his
minister the name of the family whose turn it was on the preceding
night to offer a victim to the Rakshasi. The head of that family, on
being brought before the king, related how two youthful travellers,
who were guests in his house, volunteered to go into the temple
in the room of a member of his family. The door of the temple was
broken open; Sahasra Dal and Champa Dal and their horses were found
all safe; and the head of the Rakshasi, which was with them, proved
beyond the shadow of a doubt that they had killed the monster. The
king kept his word. He gave his daughter in marriage to Sahasra Dal
and the sovereignty of half his dominions. Champa Dal remained with
his friend in the king's palace, and rejoiced in his prosperity.

Sahasra Dal and Champa Dal lived together happily for some time, when
a misunderstanding arose between them in this wise. There was in the
service of the queen-mother a certain maid-servant who was the most
useful domestic in the palace. There was nothing which she could not
put her hands to and perform. She had uncommon strength for a woman;
neither was her intelligence of a mean order. She was a woman of
immense activity and energy; and if she were absent one day from the
palace, the affairs of the zenana would be in perfect disorder. Hence
her services were highly valued by the queen-mother and all the ladies
of the palace. But this woman was not a woman; she was a Rakshasi, who
had put on the appearance of a woman to serve some purposes of her own,
and then taken service in the royal household. At night, when every
one in the palace was asleep, she used to assume her own real form, and
go about in quest of food, for the quantity of food that is sufficient
for either man or woman was not sufficient for a Rakshasi. Now Champa
Dal, having no wife, was in the habit of sleeping outside the zenana,
and not far from the outer gate of the palace. He had noticed her going
about on the premises and devouring sundry goats and sheep, horses and
elephants. The maid-servant, finding that Champa Dal was in the way of
her supper, determined to get rid of him. She accordingly went one day
to the queen-mother, and said, "Queen-mother! I am unable any longer
to work in the palace." "Why? what is the matter, Dasi? [11] How can
I get on without you? Tell me your reasons. What ails you?" "Why,"
said the woman, "nowadays it is impossible for a poor woman like
me to preserve my honour in the palace. There is that Champa Dal,
the friend of your son-in-law; he always cracks indecent jokes with
me. It is better for me to beg for my rice than to lose my honour. If
Champa Dal remains in the palace I must go away." As the maid-servant
was an absolute necessity in the palace, the queen-mother resolved
to sacrifice Champa Dal to her. She therefore told Sahasra Dal that
Champa Dal was a bad man, that his character was loose, and that
therefore he must leave the palace. Sahasra Dal earnestly pleaded on
behalf of his friend, but in vain; the queen-mother had made up her
mind to drive him out of the palace. Sahasra Dal had not the courage
to speak personally to his friend on the subject; he therefore wrote
a letter to him, in which he simply said that for certain reasons
Champa must leave the palace immediately. The letter was put in his
room after he had gone to bathe. On reading the letter Champa Dal,
exceedingly grieved, mounted his fleet horse and left the palace.

As Champa's horse was uncommonly fleet, in a few hours he traversed
thousands of miles, and at last found himself at the gateway of what
seemed a magnificent palace. Dismounting from his horse, he entered
the house, where he did not meet with a single creature. He went from
apartment to apartment, but though they were all richly furnished he
did not see a single human being. At last, in one of the side rooms,
he found a young lady of heavenly beauty lying down on a splendid
bedstead. She was asleep. Champa Dal looked upon the sleeping beauty
with rapture--he had not seen any woman so beautiful. Upon the bed,
near the head of the young lady, were two sticks, one of silver and the
other of gold. Champa took the silver stick into his hand, and touched
with it the body of the lady; but no change was perceptible. He then
took up the gold stick and laid it upon the lady, when in a trice
she woke up, sat in her bed, and eyeing the stranger, inquired who
he was. Champa Dal briefly told his story. The young lady, or rather
princess--for she was nothing less--said, "Unhappy man! why have you
come here? This is the country of Rakshasas, and in this house and
round about there live no less than seven hundred Rakshasas. They
all go away to the other side of the ocean every morning in search of
provisions; and they all return every evening before dusk. My father
was formerly king in these regions, and had millions of subjects, who
lived in flourishing towns and cities. But some years ago the invasion
of the Rakshasas took place, and they devoured all his subjects,
and himself and my mother, and my brothers and sisters. They devoured
also all the cattle of the country. There is no living human being in
these regions excepting myself; and I too should long ago have been
devoured had not an old Rakshasi, conceiving strange affection for
me, prevented the other Rakshasas from eating me up. You see those
sticks of silver and gold; the old Rakshasi, when she goes away in
the morning, kills me with the silver stick, and on her return in
the evening re-animates me with the gold stick. I do not know how
to advise you; if the Rakshasas see you, you are a dead man." Then
they both talked to each other in a very affectionate manner, and
laid their heads together to devise if possible some means of escape
from the hands of the Rakshasas. The hour of the return of the seven
hundred raw-eaters was fast approaching; and Keshavati--for that
was the name of the princess, so called from the abundance of her
hair--told Champa to hide himself in the heaps of the sacred trefoil
which were lying in the temple of Siva in the central part of the
palace. Before Champa went to his place of concealment, he touched
Keshavati with the silver stick, on which she instantly died.

Shortly after sunset Champa Dal heard from beneath the heaps of the
sacred trefoil the sound as of a mighty rushing wind. Presently he
heard terrible noises in the palace. The Rakshasas had come home
from cruising, after having filled their stomachs, each one, with
sundry goats, sheep, cows, horses, buffaloes, and elephants. The old
Rakshasi, of whom we have already spoken, came to Keshavati's room,
roused her by touching her body with the gold stick, and said--


           "Hye, mye, khye!
            A human being I smell."


On which Keshavati said, "I am the only human being here; eat me if you
like." To which the raw-eater replied, "Let me eat up your enemies;
why should I eat you?" She laid herself down on the ground, as long
and as high as the Vindhya Hills, and presently fell asleep. The other
Rakshasas and Rakshasis also soon fell asleep, being all tired out on
account of their gigantic labours in the day. Keshavati also composed
herself to sleep; while Champa, not daring to come out of the heaps
of leaves, tried his best to court the god of repose. At daybreak all
the raw-eaters, seven hundred in number, got up and went as usual to
their hunting and predatory excursions, and along with them went the
old Rakshasi, after touching Keshavati with the silver stick. When
Champa Dal saw that the coast was clear, he came out of the temple,
walked into Keshavati's room, and touched her with the gold stick,
on which she woke up. They sauntered about in the gardens, enjoying
the cool breeze of the morning; they bathed in a lucid tank which
was in the grounds; they ate and drank, and spent the day in sweet
converse. They concocted a plan for their deliverance. They settled
that Keshavati should ask the old Rakshasi on what the life of a
Rakshasa depended, and when the secret should be made known they would
adopt measures accordingly. As on the preceding evening, Champa, after
touching his fair friend with the silver stick, took refuge in the
temple beneath the heaps of the sacred trefoil. At dusk the Rakshasas
as usual came home; and the old Rakshasi, rousing her pet, said--


           "Hye, mye, khye!
            A human being I smell."


Keshavati answered, "What other human being is here excepting
myself? Eat me up, if you like." "Why should I eat you, my darling? Let
me eat up all your enemies." Then she laid down on the ground her huge
body, which looked like a part of the Himalaya mountains. Keshavati,
with a phial of heated mustard oil, went towards the feet of the
Rakshasi, and said, "Mother, your feet are sore with walking; let me
rub them with oil." So saying, she began to rub with oil the Rakshasi's
feet; and while she was in the act of doing so, a few tear-drops from
her eyes fell on the monster's leg. The Rakshasi smacked the tear-drops
with her lips, and finding the taste briny, said, "Why are you weeping,
darling? What aileth thee?" To which the princess replied, "Mother,
I am weeping because you are old, and when you die I shall certainly
be devoured by one of the Rakshasas." "When I die! Know, foolish girl,
that we Rakshasas never die. We are not naturally immortal, but our
life depends on a secret which no human being can unravel. Let me
tell you what it is that you may be comforted. You know yonder tank;
there is in the middle of it a Sphatikasthambha, [12] on the top of
which in deep waters are two bees. If any human being can dive into
the waters, and bring up to land the two bees from the pillar in one
breath, and destroy them so that not a drop of their blood falls to
the ground, then we Rakshasas shall certainly die; but if a single
drop of blood falls to the ground, then from it will start up a
thousand Rakshasas. But what human being will find out this secret,
or, finding it, will be able to achieve the feat? You need not,
therefore, darling, be sad; I am practically immortal." Keshavati
treasured up the secret in her memory, and went to sleep.

Early next morning the Rakshasas as usual went away; Champa came
out of his hiding-place, roused Keshavati, and fell a-talking. The
princess told him the secret she had learnt from the Rakshasi. Champa
immediately made preparations for accomplishing the mighty deed. He
brought to the side of the tank a knife and a quantity of ashes. He
disrobed himself, put a drop or two of mustard oil into each of his
ears to prevent water from entering in, and dived into the waters. In
a moment he got to the top of the crystal pillar in the middle of the
tank, caught hold of the two bees he found there, and came up in one
breath. Taking the knife, he cut up the bees over the ashes, a drop
or two of the blood fell, not on the ground, but on the ashes. When
Champa caught hold of the bees, a terrible scream was heard at a
distance. This was the wailing of the Rakshasas, who were all running
home to prevent the bees from being killed; but before they could reach
the palace, the bees had perished. The moment the bees were killed,
all the Rakshasas died, and their carcases fell on the very spot on
which they were standing. Champa and the princess afterwards found
that the gateway of the palace was blocked up by the huge carcases
of the Rakshasas--some of them having nearly succeeded in getting to
the palace. In this manner was effected the destruction of the seven
hundred Rakshasas.

After the destruction of the seven hundred raw-eating monsters, Champa
Dal and Keshavati got married together by the exchange of garlands of
flowers. The princess, who had never been out of the house, naturally
expressed a desire to see the outer world. They used every day to
take long walks both morning and evening, and as a large river was
hard by Keshavati wished to bathe in it. The first day they went to
bathe, one of Keshavati's hairs came off, and as it is the custom
with women never to throw away a hair unaccompanied with something
else, she tied the hair to a shell which was floating on the water;
after which they returned home. In the meantime the shell with the hair
tied to it floated down the stream, and in course of time reached that
ghat [13] at which Sahasra Dal and his companions were in the habit
of performing their ablutions. The shell passed by when Sahasra Dal
and his friends were bathing; and he, seeing it at some distance,
said to them, "Whoever succeeds in catching hold of yonder shell
shall be rewarded with a hundred rupees." They all swam towards it,
and Sahasra Dal, being the fleetest swimmer, got it. On examining
it he found a hair tied to it. But such hair! He had never seen so
long a hair. It was exactly seven cubits long. "The owner of this
hair must be a remarkable woman, and I must see her"--such was the
resolution of Sahasra Dal. He went home from the river in a pensive
mood, and instead of proceeding to the zenana for breakfast, remained
in the outer part of the palace. The queen-mother, on hearing that
Sahasra Dal was looking melancholy and had not come to breakfast,
went to him and asked the reason. He showed her the hair, and said
he must see the woman whose head it had adorned. The queen-mother
said, "Very well, you shall have that lady in the palace as soon as
possible. I promise you to bring her here." The queen-mother told her
favourite maid-servant, whom she knew to be full of resources--the same
who was a Rakshasi in disguise--that she must, as soon as possible,
bring to the palace that lady who was the owner of the hair seven
cubits long. The maid-servant said she would be quite able to fetch
her. By her directions a boat was built of Hajol wood, the oars of
which were of Mon Paban wood. The boat was launched on the stream,
and she went on board of it with some baskets of wicker-work of
curious workmanship; she also took with her some sweetmeats into
which some poison had been mixed. She snapped her fingers thrice,
and uttered the following charm:--


           "Boat of Hajol!
            Oars of Mon Paban!
            Take me to the Ghat,
            In which Keshavati bathes."


No sooner had the words been uttered than the boat flew like lightning
over the waters. It went on and on, leaving behind many a town and
city. At last it stopped at a bathing-place, which the Rakshasi
maid-servant concluded was the bathing ghat of Keshavati. She landed
with the sweetmeats in her hand. She went to the gate of the palace,
and cried aloud, "O Keshavati! Keshavati! I am your aunt, your mother's
sister. I am come to see you, my darling, after so many years. Are you
in, Keshavati?" The princess, on hearing these words, came out of her
room, and making no doubt that she was her aunt, embraced and kissed
her. They both wept rivers of joy--at least the Rakshasi maid-servant
did, and Keshavati followed suit through sympathy. Champa Dal also
thought that she was the aunt of his newly married wife. They all
ate and drank and took rest in the middle of the day. Champa Dal,
as was his habit, went to sleep after breakfast. Towards afternoon,
the supposed aunt said to Keshavati, "Let us both go to the river and
wash ourselves." Keshavati replied, "How can we go now? my husband
is sleeping." "Never mind," said the aunt, "let him sleep on; let me
put these sweetmeats, that I have brought, near his bedside, that he
may eat them when he gets up." They then went to the river-side close
to the spot where the boat was. Keshavati, when she saw from some
distance the baskets of wicker-work in the boat, said, "Aunt, what
beautiful things are those! I wish I could get some of them." "Come,
my child, come and look at them; and you can have as many as you
like." Keshavati at first refused to go into the boat, but on being
pressed by her aunt, she went. The moment they two were on board,
the aunt snapped her fingers thrice and said:--


           "Boat of Hajol!
            Oars of Mon Paban!
            Take me to the Ghat,
            In which Sahasra Dal bathes."


As soon as these magical words were uttered the boat moved and flew
like an arrow over the waters. Keshavati was frightened and began to
cry, but the boat went on and on, leaving behind many towns and cities,
and in a trice reached the ghat where Sahasra Dal was in the habit of
bathing. Keshavati was taken to the palace; Sahasra Dal admired her
beauty and the length of her hair; and the ladies of the palace tried
their best to comfort her. But she set up a loud cry, and wanted to be
taken back to her husband. At last when she saw that she was a captive,
she told the ladies of the palace that she had taken a vow that she
would not see the face of any strange man for six months. She was
then lodged apart from the rest in a small house, the window of which
overlooked the road; there she spent the livelong day and also the
livelong night--for she had very little sleep--in sighing and weeping.

In the meantime when Champa Dal awoke from sleep, he was distracted
with grief at not finding his wife. He now thought that the woman,
who pretended to be his wife's aunt, was a cheat and an impostor,
and that she must have carried away Keshavati. He did not eat the
sweetmeats, suspecting they might be poisoned. He threw one of
them to a crow which, the moment it ate it, dropped down dead. He
was now the more confirmed in his unfavourable opinion of the
pretended aunt. Maddened with grief, he rushed out of the house,
and determined to go whithersoever his eyes might lead him. Like a
madman, always blubbering "O Keshavati! O Keshavati!" he travelled
on foot day after day, not knowing whither he went. Six months were
spent in this wearisome travelling when, at the end of that period, he
reached the capital of Sahasra Dal. He was passing by the palace-gate
when the sighs and wailings of a woman sitting at the window of
a house, on the road-side, attracted his attention. One moment's
look, and they recognised each other. They continued to hold secret
communications. Champa Dal heard everything, including the story of
her vow, the period of which was to terminate the following day. It
is customary, on the fulfilment of a vow, for some learned Brahman
to make public recitations of events connected with the vow and
the person who makes it. It was settled that Champa Dal should take
upon himself the functions of the reciter. Accordingly, next morning,
when it was proclaimed by beat of drum that the king wanted a learned
Brahman who could recite the story of Keshavati on the fulfilment
of her vow, Champa Dal touched the drum and said that he would make
the recitation. Next morning a gorgeous assembly was held in the
courtyard of the palace under a huge canopy of silk. The old king,
Sahasra Dal, all the courtiers and the learned Brahmans of the country,
were present there. Keshavati was also there behind a screen that she
might not be exposed to the rude gaze of the people. Champa Dal, the
reciter, sitting on a dais, began the story of Keshavati, as we have
related it, from the beginning, commencing with the words--"There
was a poor and half-witted Brahman, etc." As he was going on with
the story, the reciter every now and then asked Keshavati behind the
screen whether the story was correct; to which question she as often
replied, "Quite correct; go on, Brahman." During the recitation of
the story the Rakshasi maid-servant grew pale, as she perceived that
her real character was discovered; and Sahasra Dal was astonished
at the knowledge of the reciter regarding the history of his own
life. The moment the story was finished, Sahasra Dal jumped up from
his seat, and embracing the reciter, said, "You can be none other
than my brother Champa Dal." Then the prince, inflamed with rage,
ordered the maid-servant into his presence. A large hole, as deep
as the height of a man, was dug in the ground; the maid-servant was
put into it in a standing posture; prickly thorn was heaped around
her up to the crown of her head: in this wise was the maid-servant
buried alive. After this Sahasra Dal and his princess, and Champa
Dal and Keshavati, lived happily together many years.


            Thus my story endeth,
            The Natiya-thorn withereth, etc.







V

THE STORY OF SWET-BASANTA


There was a rich merchant who had an only son whom he loved
passionately. He gave to his son whatever he wanted. His son wanted
a beautiful house in the midst of a large garden. The house was built
for him, and the grounds were laid out into a fine garden. One day as
the merchant's son was walking in his garden, he put his hand into
the nest of a small bird called toontooni, and found in it an egg,
which he took and put in an almirah which was dug into the wall of
his house. He closed the door of the almirah, and thought no more of
the egg.

Though the merchant's son had a house of his own, he had no separate
establishment; at any rate he kept no cook, for his mother used to
send him regularly his breakfast and dinner every day. The egg which
he deposited in the wall-almirah one day burst, and out of it came a
beautiful infant, a girl. But the merchant's son knew nothing about
it. He had forgotten everything about the egg, and the door of the
wall-almirah had been kept closed, though not locked, ever since the
day the egg was put there. The child grew up within the wall-almirah
without the knowledge of the merchant's son or of any one else. When
the child could walk, it had the curiosity one day to open the door;
and seeing some food on the floor (the breakfast of the merchant's son
sent by his mother), it came out, and ate a little of it, and returned
to its cell in the wall-almirah. As the mother of the merchant's
son sent him always more than he could himself eat, he perceived no
diminution in the quantity. The girl of the wall-almirah used every
day to come out and eat a part of the food, and after eating used
to return to her place in the almirah. But as the girl got older and
older, she began to eat more and more; hence the merchant's son began
to perceive a diminution in the quantity of his food. Not dreaming of
the existence of the wall-almirah girl, he wondered that his mother
should send him such a small quantity of food. He sent word to his
mother, complaining of the insufficiency of his meals, and of the
slovenly manner in which the food was served up in the dish; for the
girl of the wall-almirah used to finger the rice, curry, and other
articles of food, and as she always went in a hurry back into the
almirah that she might not be perceived by any one, she had no time
to put the rice and the other things into proper order after she had
eaten part of them. The mother was astonished at her son's complaint,
for she gave always a much larger quantity than she knew her son could
consume, and the food was served up on a silver plate neatly by her
own hand. But as her son repeated the same complaint day after day,
she began to suspect foul play. She told her son to watch and see
whether any one ate part of it unperceived. Accordingly, one day when
the servant brought the breakfast and laid it in a clean place on the
floor, the merchant's son, instead of going to bathe as it had hitherto
been his custom, hid himself in a secret place and began to watch. In
a few minutes he saw the door of the wall-almirah open; a beautiful
damsel of sweet sixteen stepped out of it, sat on the carpet spread
before the breakfast, and began to eat. The merchant's son came out
of his hiding-place, and the damsel could not escape. "Who are you,
beautiful creature? You do not seem to be earth-born. Are you one
of the daughters of the gods?" asked the merchant's son. The girl
replied, "I do not know who I am. This I know, that one day I found
myself in yonder almirah, and have been ever since living in it." The
merchant's son thought it strange. He now remembered that sixteen years
before he had put in the almirah an egg he had found in the nest of
a toontooni bird. The uncommon beauty of the wall-almirah girl made
a deep impression on the mind of the merchant's son, and he resolved
in his mind to marry her. The girl no more went into the almirah, but
lived in one of the rooms of the spacious house of the merchant's son.

The next day the merchant's son sent word to his mother to the effect
that he would like to get married. His mother reproached herself
for not having long before thought of her son's marriage, and sent
a message to her son to the effect that she and his father would
the next day send ghataks [14] to different countries to seek for a
suitable bride. The merchant's son sent word that he had secured for
himself a most lovable young lady, and that if his parents had no
objections he would produce her before them. Accordingly the young
lady of the wall-almirah was taken to the merchant's house; and the
merchant and his wife were so struck with the matchless beauty, grace,
and loveliness of the stranger, that, without asking any questions
as to her birth, the nuptials were celebrated.

In course of time the merchant's son had two sons; the elder he
named Swet and the younger Basanta. The old merchant died and so
did his wife. Swet and Basanta grew up fine lads, and the elder was
in due time married. Some time after Swet's marriage his mother,
the wall-almirah lady, also died, and the widower lost no time in
marrying a young and beautiful wife. As Swet's wife was older than
his stepmother, she became the mistress of the house. The stepmother,
like all stepmothers, hated Swet and Basanta with a perfect hatred;
and the two ladies were naturally often at loggerheads with each other.

It so happened one day that a fisherman brought to the merchant (we
shall no longer call him the merchant's son, as his father had died)
a fish of singular beauty. It was unlike any other fish that had
been seen. The fish had marvellous qualities ascribed to it by the
fisherman. If any one eats it, said he, when he laughs maniks [15]
will drop from his mouth, and when he weeps pearls will drop from his
eyes. The merchant, hearing of the wonderful properties of the fish,
bought it at one thousand rupees, and put it into the hands of Swet's
wife, who was the mistress of the house, strictly enjoining on her
to cook it well and to give it to him alone to eat. The mistress,
or house-mother, who had overheard the conversation between her
father-in-law and the fisherman, secretly resolved in her mind to
give the cooked fish to her husband and to his brother to eat, and to
give to her father-in-law instead a frog daintily cooked. When she had
finished cooking both the fish and the frog, she heard the noise of a
squabble between her stepmother-in-law and her husband's brother. It
appears that Basanta, who was but a lad yet, was passionately fond
of pigeons, which he tamed. One of these pigeons had flown into the
room of his stepmother, who had secreted it in her clothes. Basanta
rushed into the room, and loudly demanded the pigeon. His stepmother
denied any knowledge of the pigeon, on which the elder brother,
Swet, forcibly took out the bird from her clothes and gave it to
his brother. The stepmother cursed and swore, and added, "Wait,
when the head of the house comes home I will make him shed the blood
of you both before I give him water to drink." Swet's wife called
her husband and said to him, "My dearest lord, that woman is a most
wicked woman, and has boundless influence over my father-in-law. She
will make him do what she has threatened. Our life is in imminent
danger. Let us first eat a little, and let us all three run away
from this place." Swet forthwith called Basanta to him, and told him
what he had heard from his wife. They resolved to run away before
nightfall. The woman placed before her husband and her brother-in-law
the fish of wonderful properties, and they ate of it heartily. The
woman packed up all her jewels in a box. As there was only one horse,
and it was of uncommon fleetness, the three sat upon it; Swet held
the reins, the woman sat in the middle with the jewel-box in her lap,
and Basanta brought up the rear.

The horse galloped with the utmost swiftness. They passed through
many a plain and many a noted town, till after midnight they found
themselves in a forest not far from the bank of a river. Here
the most untoward event took place. Swet's wife began to feel the
pains of child-birth. They dismounted, and in an hour or two Swet's
wife gave birth to a son. What were the two brothers to do in this
forest? A fire must be kindled to give heat both to the mother and
the new-born baby. But where was the fire to be got? There were no
human habitations visible. Still fire must be procured--and it was
the month of December--or else both the mother and the baby would
certainly perish. Swet told Basanta to sit beside his wife, while he
set out in the darkness of the night in search of fire.

Swet walked many a mile in darkness. Still he saw no human
habitations. At last the genial light of Sukra [16] somewhat illumined
his path, and he saw at a distance what seemed a large city. He was
congratulating himself on his journey's end and on his being able to
obtain fire for the benefit of his poor wife lying cold in the forest
with the new-born babe, when on a sudden an elephant, gorgeously
caparisoned, shot across his path, and gently taking him up by his
trunk, placed him on the rich howdah [17] on its back. It then walked
rapidly towards the city. Swet was quite taken aback. He did not
understand the meaning of the elephant's action, and wondered what
was in store for him. A crown was in store for him. In that kingdom,
the chief city of which he was approaching, every morning a king was
elected, for the king of the previous day was always found dead in
the morning in the room of the queen. What caused the death of the
king no one knew; neither did the queen herself (for every successive
king took her to wife) know the cause. And the elephant who took
hold of Swet was the king-maker. Early in the morning it went about,
sometimes to distant places, and whosoever was brought on its back was
acknowledged king by the people. The elephant majestically marched
through the crowded streets of the city, amid the acclamations of
the people, the meaning of which Swet did not understand, entered
the palace, and placed him on the throne. He was proclaimed king
amid the rejoicings of some and the lamentations of others. In the
course of the day he heard of the strange fatality which overtook
every night the elected king of those realms, but being possessed of
great discretion and courage, he took every precaution to avert the
dreadful catastrophe. Yet he hardly knew what expedients to adopt,
as he was unacquainted with the nature of the danger. He resolved,
however, upon two things, and these were, to go armed into the
queen's bedchamber, and to sit up awake the whole night. The queen
was young and of exquisite beauty, and so guileless and benevolent
was the expression of her face that it was impossible from looking
at her to suppose that she could use any foul means of taking away
the life of her nightly consort. In the queen's chamber Swet spent a
very agreeable evening; as the night advanced the queen fell asleep,
but Swet kept awake, and was on the alert, looking at every creek
and corner of the room, and expecting every minute to be murdered. In
the dead of night he perceived something like a thread coming out of
the left nostril of the queen. The thread was so thin that it was
almost invisible. As he watched it he found it several yards long,
and yet it was coming out. When the whole of it had come out, it
began to grow thick, and in a few minutes it assumed the form of a
huge serpent. In a moment Swet cut off the head of the serpent, the
body of which wriggled violently. He sat quiet in the room, expecting
other adventures. But nothing else happened. The queen slept longer
than usual as she had been relieved of the huge snake which had made
her stomach its den. Early next morning the ministers came expecting
as usual to hear of the king's death; but when the ladies of the
bedchamber knocked at the door of the queen they were astonished
to see Swet come out. It was then known to all the people how that
every night a terrible snake issued from the queen's nostrils, how
it devoured the king every night, and how it had at last been killed
by the fortunate Swet. The whole country rejoiced in the prospect
of a permanent king. It is a strange thing, nevertheless it is true,
that Swet did not remember his poor wife with the new-born babe lying
in the forest, nor his brother attending on her. With the possession
of the throne he seemed to forget the whole of his past history.

Basanta, to whom his brother had entrusted his wife and child, sat
watching for many a weary hour, expecting every moment to see Swet
return with fire. The whole night passed away without his return. At
sunrise he went to the bank of the river which was close by, and
anxiously looked about for his brother, but in vain. Distressed beyond
measure, he sat on the river side and wept. A boat was passing by in
which a merchant was returning to his country. As the boat was not
far from the shore the merchant saw Basanta weeping; and what struck
the attention of the merchant was the heap of what looked like pearls
near the weeping man. At the request of the merchant the boatman took
his vessel towards the bank; the merchant went to the weeping man,
and found that the heap was a heap of real pearls of the finest
lustre: and what astonished him most of all was that the heap was
increasing every second, for the tear-drops that were falling from
his eyes fell to the ground not as tears but as pearls. The merchant
stowed away the heap of pearls into his boat, and with the help of his
servants caught hold of Basanta himself, put him on board the vessel,
and tied him to a post. Basanta, of course, resisted; but what could
he do against so many? Thinking of his brother, his brother's wife
and baby, and his own captivity, Basanta wept more bitterly than
before, which mightily pleased the merchant, as the more tears his
captive shed the richer he himself became. When the merchant reached
his native town he confined Basanta in a room, and at stated hours
every day scourged him in order to make him shed tears, every one of
which was converted into a bright pearl. The merchant one day said
to his servants, "As the fellow is making me rich by his weeping,
let us see what he gives me by laughing." Accordingly he began to
tickle his captive, on which Basanta laughed, and as he laughed a
great many maniks dropped from his mouth. After this poor Basanta
was alternately whipped and tickled all the day and far into the
night; and the merchant, in consequence, became the wealthiest man
in the land. Leaving Basanta subjected to the alternate processes
of castigation and titillation, let us attend to the fortunes of the
poor wife of Swet, alone in the forest, with a child just born.

Swet's wife, apparently deserted by her husband and her brother-in-law,
was overwhelmed with grief. A woman, but a few hours since delivered
of a child--and her first child, alone, and in a forest, far from the
habitations of men,--her case was indeed pitiable. She wept rivers of
tears. Excessive grief, however, brought her relief. She fell asleep
with the new-born baby in her arms. It so happened that at that
hour the Kotwal (prefect of the police) of the country was passing
that way. He had been very unfortunate with regard to his offspring;
every child his wife presented him with died shortly after birth, and
he was now going to bury the last infant on the banks of the river. As
he was going, he saw in the forest a woman sleeping with a baby in her
arms. It was a lively and beautiful boy. The Kotwal coveted the lovely
infant. He quietly took it up, put in its place his own dead child,
and returning home, told his wife that the child had not really died
and had revived. Swet's wife, unconscious of the deceit practised
upon her by the Kotwal, on waking found her child dead. The distress
of her mind may be imagined. The whole world became dark to her. She
was distracted with grief, and in her distraction she formed the
resolution of committing suicide. The river was not far from the spot,
and she determined to drown herself in it. She took in her hand the
bundle of jewels and proceeded to the river-side. An old Brahman was
at no great distance, performing his morning ablutions. He noticed
the woman going into the water, and naturally thought that she was
going to bathe; but when he saw her going far into deep waters, some
suspicion arose in his mind. Discontinuing his devotions, he bawled
out and ordered the woman to come to him. Swet's wife seeing that it
was an old man that was calling her, retraced her steps and came to
him. On being asked what she was about to do, she said that she was
going to make an end of herself, and that as she had some jewels with
her she would be obliged if he would accept them as a present. At the
request of the old Brahman she related to him her whole story. The
upshot was, that she was prevented from drowning herself, and that
she was received into the Brahman's family, where she was treated by
the Brahman's wife as her own daughter.

Years passed on. The reputed son of the Kotwal grew up a vigorous,
robust lad. As the house of the old Brahman was not far from the
Kotwal's, the Kotwal's son used accidentally to meet the handsome
strange woman who passed for the Brahman's daughter. The lad liked
the woman, and wanted to marry her. He spoke to his father about
the woman, and the father spoke to the Brahman. The Brahman's rage
knew no bounds. What! the infidel Kotwal's son aspiring to the hand
of a Brahman's daughter! A dwarf may as well aspire to catch hold of
the moon! But the Kotwal's son determined to have her by force. With
this wicked object he one day scaled the wall that encompassed the
Brahman's house, and got upon the thatched roof of the Brahman's
cow-house. While he was reconnoitering from that lofty position, he
heard the following conversation between two calves in the cow-house:--

First Calf. Men accuse us of brutish ignorance and immorality; but
in my opinion men are fifty times worse.

Second Calf. What makes you say so, brother? Have you witnessed to-day
any instance of human depravity?

First Calf. Who can be a greater monster of crime than the same lad
who is at this moment standing on the thatched roof of this hut over
our head?

Second Calf. Why, I thought it was only the son of our Kotwal; and
I never heard that he was exceptionally vicious.

First Calf. You never heard, but now you hear from me. This wicked
lad is now wishing to get married to his own mother!

The First Calf then related to the inquisitive Second Calf in full
the story of Swet and Basanta; how they and Swet's wife fled from
the vengeance of their stepmother; how Swet's wife was delivered of a
child in the forest by the river-side; how Swet was made king by the
elephant, and how he succeeded in killing the serpent which issued out
of the queen's nostrils; how Basanta was carried away by the merchant,
confined in a dungeon, and alternately flogged and tickled for pearls
and maniks; how the Kotwal exchanged his dead child for the living
one of Swet; how Swet's wife was prevented from drowning herself in
the river by the Brahman; how she was received into the Brahman's
family and treated as his daughter; how the Kotwal's son grew up a
hardy, lusty youth, and fell in love with her; and how at that very
moment he was intent on accomplishing his brutal object. All this
story the Kotwal's son heard from the thatched roof of the cow-house,
and was struck with horror. He forthwith got down from the thatch,
and went home and told his father that he must have an interview
with the king. Notwithstanding his reputed father's protestations
to the contrary, he had an interview with the king, to whom he
repeated the whole story as he had overheard it from the thatch of
the cow-house. The king now remembered his poor wife's case. She
was brought from the house of the Brahman, whom he richly rewarded,
and put her in her proper position as the queen of the kingdom;
the reputed son of the Kotwal was acknowledged as his own son, and
proclaimed the heir-apparent to the throne; Basanta was brought out
of the dungeon, and the wicked merchant who had maltreated him was
buried alive in the earth surrounded with thorns. After this, Swet,
his wife and son, and Basanta, lived together happily for many years.


            Now my story endeth,
            The Natiya-thorn withereth, etc.







VI

THE EVIL EYE OF SANI


Once upon a time Sani, or Saturn, the god of bad luck, and Lakshmi,
the goddess of good luck, fell out with each other in heaven. Sani said
he was higher in rank than Lakshmi, and Lakshmi said she was higher in
rank than Sani. As all the gods and goddesses of heaven were equally
ranged on either side, the contending deities agreed to refer the
matter to some human being who had a name for wisdom and justice. Now,
there lived at that time upon earth a man of the name of Sribatsa,
[18] who was as wise and just as he was rich. Him, therefore, both the
god and the goddess chose as the settler of their dispute. One day,
accordingly, Sribatsa was told that Sani and Lakshmi were wishing to
pay him a visit to get their dispute settled. Sribatsa was in a fix. If
he said Sani was higher in rank than Lakshmi, she would be angry with
him and forsake him. If he said Lakshmi was higher in rank than Sani,
Sani would cast his evil eye upon him. Hence he made up his mind not to
say anything directly, but to leave the god and the goddess to gather
his opinion from his action. He got two stools made, the one of gold
and the other of silver, and placed them beside him. When Sani and
Lakshmi came to Sribatsa, he told Sani to sit upon the silver stool,
and Lakshmi upon the gold stool. Sani became mad with rage, and said
in an angry tone to Sribatsa, "Well, as you consider me lower in rank
than Lakshmi, I will cast my eye on you for three years; and I should
like to see how you fare at the end of that period." The god then went
away in high dudgeon. Lakshmi, before going away, said to Sribatsa,
"My child, do not fear. I'll befriend you." The god and the goddess
then went away.

Sribatsa said to his wife, whose name was Chintamani, "Dearest, as the
evil eye of Sani will be upon me at once, I had better go away from the
house; for if I remain in the house with you, evil will befall you and
me; but if I go away, it will overtake me only." Chintamani said, "That
cannot be; wherever you go, I will go, your lot shall be my lot." The
husband tried hard to persuade his wife to remain at home; but it was
of no use. She would go with her husband. Sribatsa accordingly told
his wife to make an opening in their mattress, and to stow away in
it all the money and jewels they had. On the eve of leaving their
house, Sribatsa invoked Lakshmi, who forthwith appeared. He then
said to her, "Mother Lakshmi! as the evil eye of Sani is upon us,
we are going away into exile; but do thou befriend us, and take
care of our house and property." The goddess of good luck answered,
"Do not fear; I'll befriend you; all will be right at last." They
then set out on their journey. Sribatsa rolled up the mattress and
put it on his head. They had not gone many miles when they saw a
river before them. It was not fordable; but there was a canoe there
with a man sitting in it. The travellers requested the ferryman to
take them across. The ferryman said, "I can take only one at a time;
but you are three--yourself, your wife, and the mattress." Sribatsa
proposed that first his wife and the mattress should be taken across,
and then he; but the ferryman would not hear of it. "Only one at a
time," repeated he; "first let me take across the mattress." When the
canoe with the mattress was in the middle of the stream, a fierce gale
arose, and carried away the mattress, the canoe, and the ferryman,
no one knows whither. And it was strange the stream also disappeared,
for the place, where they saw a few minutes since the rush of waters,
had now become firm ground. Sribatsa then knew that this was nothing
but the evil eye of Sani.

Sribatsa and his wife, without a pice in their pocket, went to a
village which was hard by. It was dwelt in for the most part by
wood-cutters, who used to go at sunrise to the forest to cut wood,
which they sold in a town not far from the village. Sribatsa proposed
to the wood-cutters that he should go along with them to cut wood. They
agreed. So he began to fell trees as well as the best of them; but
there was this difference between Sribatsa and the other wood-cutters,
that whereas the latter cut any and every sort of wood, the former cut
only precious wood like sandal-wood. The wood-cutters used to bring
to market large loads of common wood, and Sribatsa only a few pieces
of sandal-wood, for which he got a great deal more money than the
others. As this was going on day after day, the wood-cutters through
envy plotted together, and drove away from the village Sribatsa and
his wife.

The next place they went to was a village of weavers, or rather
cotton-spinners. Here Chintamani, the wife of Sribatsa, made herself
useful by spinning cotton. And as she was an intelligent and skilful
woman, she spun finer thread than the other women; and she got more
money. This roused the envy of the native women of the village. But
this was not all. Sribatsa, in order to gain the good grace of
the weavers, asked them to a feast, the dishes of which were all
cooked by his wife. As Chintamani excelled in cooking, the barbarous
weavers of the village were quite charmed by the delicacies set
before them. When the men went to their homes, they reproached their
wives for not being able to cook so well as the wife of Sribatsa,
and called them good-for-nothing women. This thing made the women of
the village hate Chintamani the more. One day Chintamani went to the
river-side to bathe along with the other women of the village. A boat
had been lying on the bank stranded on the sand for many days; they
had tried to move it, but in vain. It so happened that as Chintamani
by accident touched the boat, it moved off to the river. The boatmen,
astonished at the event, thought that the woman had uncommon power,
and might be useful on similar occasions in future. They therefore
caught hold of her, put her in the boat, and rowed off. The women of
the village, who were present, did not offer any resistance as they
hated Chintamani. When Sribatsa heard how his wife had been carried
away by boatmen, he became mad with grief. He left the village, went to
the river-side, and resolved to follow the course of the stream till
he should meet the boat where his wife was a prisoner. He travelled
on and on, along the side of the river, till it became dark. As there
were no huts to be seen, he climbed into a tree for the night. Next
morning as he got down from the tree he saw at the foot of it a cow
called a Kapila-cow, which never calves, but which gives milk at all
hours of the day whenever it is milked. Sribatsa milked the cow, and
drank its milk to his heart's content. He was astonished to find that
the cow-dung which lay on the ground was of a bright yellow colour;
indeed, he found it was pure gold. While it was in a soft state he
wrote his own name upon it, and when in the course of the day it
became hardened, it looked like a brick of gold--and so it was. As
the tree grew on the river-side, and as the Kapila-cow came morning
and evening to supply him with milk, Sribatsa resolved to stay there
till he should meet the boat. In the meantime the gold-bricks were
increasing in number every day, for the cow both morning and evening
deposited there the precious article. He put the gold-bricks, upon
all of which his name was engraved, one upon another in rows, so that
from a distance they looked like a hillock of gold.

Leaving Sribatsa to arrange his gold-bricks under the tree on the
river-side we must follow the fortunes of his wife. Chintamani was a
woman of great beauty; and thinking that her beauty might be her ruin,
she, when seized by the boatmen, offered to Lakshmi the following
prayer----"O Mother Lakshmi! have pity upon me. Thou hast made me
beautiful, but now my beauty will undoubtedly prove my ruin by the loss
of honour and chastity. I therefore beseech thee, gracious Mother, to
make me ugly, and to cover my body with some loathsome disease, that
the boatmen may not touch me." Lakshmi heard Chintamani's prayer; and
in the twinkling of an eye, while she was in the arms of the boatmen,
her naturally beautiful form was turned into a vile carcase. The
boatmen, on putting her down in the boat, found her body covered
with loathsome sores which were giving out a disgusting stench. They
therefore threw her into the hold of the boat amongst the cargo,
where they used morning and evening to send her a little boiled rice
and some water. In that hold Chintamani had a miserable life of it;
but she greatly preferred that misery to the loss of chastity. The
boatmen went to some port, sold the cargo, and were returning to their
country when the sight of what seemed a hillock of gold, not far from
the river-side, attracted their attention. Sribatsa, whose eyes were
ever directed towards the river, was delighted when he saw a boat turn
towards the bank, as he fondly imagined his wife might be in it. The
boatmen went to the hillock of gold, when Sribatsa said that the gold
was his. They put all the gold-bricks on board their vessel, took
Sribatsa prisoner, and put him into the hold not far from the woman
covered with sores. They of course immediately recognised each other,
in spite of the change Chintamani had undergone, but thought it prudent
not to speak to each other. They communicated their ideas, therefore,
by signs and gestures. Now, the boatmen were fond of playing at dice,
and as Sribatsa appeared to them from his looks to be a respectable
man, they always asked him to join in the game. As he was an expert
player, he almost always won the game, on which the boatmen, envying
his superior skill, threw him overboard. Chintamani had the presence
of mind, at that moment, to throw into the water a pillow which she
had for resting her head upon. Sribatsa took hold of the pillow,
by means of which he floated down the stream till he was carried
at nightfall to what seemed a garden on the water's edge. There he
stuck among the trees, where he remained the whole night, wet and
shivering. Now, the garden belonged to an old widow who was in former
years the chief flower-supplier to the king of that country. Through
some cause or other a blight seemed to have come over her garden, as
almost all the trees and plants ceased flowering; she had therefore
given up her place as the flower-supplier of the royal household. On
the morning following the night on which Sribatsa had stuck among
the trees, however, the old woman on getting up from her bed could
scarcely believe her eyes when she saw the whole garden ablaze with
flowers. There was not a single tree or plant which was not begemmed
with flowers. Not understanding the cause of such a miraculous sight,
she took a walk through the garden, and found on the river's brink,
stuck among the trees, a man shivering and almost dying with cold. She
brought him to her cottage, lighted a fire to give him warmth, and
showed him every attention, as she ascribed the wonderful flowering
of her trees to his presence. After making him as comfortable as
she could, she ran to the king's palace, and told his chief servants
that she was again in a position to supply the palace with flowers;
so she was restored to her former office as the flower-woman of the
royal household. Sribatsa, who stopped a few days with the woman,
requested her to recommend him to one of the king's ministers for a
berth. He was accordingly sent for to the palace, and as he was at
once found to be a man of intelligence, the king's minister asked
him what post he would like to have. Agreeably to his wish he was
appointed collector of tolls on the river. While discharging his
duties as river toll-gatherer, in the course of a few days he saw the
very boat in which his wife was a prisoner. He detained the boat, and
charged the boatmen with the theft of gold-bricks which he claimed as
his own. At the mention of gold-bricks the king himself came to the
river-side, and was astonished beyond measure to see bricks made of
gold, every one of which had the inscription--Sribatsa. At the same
time Sribatsa rescued from the boatmen his wife, who, the moment she
came out of the vessel, became as lovely as before. The king heard
the story of Sribatsa's misfortunes from his lips, entertained him
in a princely style for many days, and at last sent him and his wife
to their own country with presents of horses and elephants. The evil
eye of Sani was now turned away from Sribatsa, and he again became
what he formerly was, the Child of Fortune.


            Thus my story endeth,
            The Natiya-thorn withereth, etc.







VII

THE BOY WHOM SEVEN MOTHERS SUCKLED


Once on a time there reigned a king who had seven queens. He was
very sad, for the seven queens were all barren. A holy mendicant,
however, one day told the king that in a certain forest there grew
a tree, on a branch of which hung seven mangoes; if the king himself
plucked those mangoes and gave one to each of the queens they would
all become mothers. So the king went to the forest, plucked the seven
mangoes that grew upon one branch, and gave a mango to each of the
queens to eat. In a short time the king's heart was filled with joy,
as he heard that the seven queens were all with child.

One day the king was out hunting, when he saw a young lady of peerless
beauty cross his path. He fell in love with her, brought her to his
palace, and married her. This lady was, however, not a human being,
but a Rakshasi; but the king of course did not know it. The king became
dotingly fond of her; he did whatever she told him. She said one day
to the king, "You say that you love me more than any one else. Let
me see whether you really love me so. If you love me, make your seven
other queens blind, and let them be killed." The king became very sad
at the request of his best-beloved queen, the more so as the seven
queens were all with child. But there was nothing for it but to comply
with the Rakshasi-queen's request. The eyes of the seven queens were
plucked out of their sockets, and the queens themselves were delivered
up to the chief minister to be destroyed. But the chief minister was
a merciful man. Instead of killing the seven queens he hid them in a
cave which was on the side of a hill. In course of time the eldest
of the seven queens gave birth to a child. "What shall I do with
the child," said she, "now that we are blind and are dying for want
of food? Let me kill the child, and let us all eat of its flesh." So
saying she killed the infant, and gave to each of her sister-queens a
part of the child to eat. The six ate their portion, but the seventh
or youngest queen did not eat her share, but laid it beside her. In a
few days the second queen also was delivered of a child, and she did
with it as her eldest sister had done with hers. So did the third,
the fourth, the fifth, and the sixth queen. At last the seventh
queen gave birth to a son; but she, instead of following the example
of her sister-queens, resolved to nurse the child. The other queens
demanded their portions of the newly-born babe. She gave each of them
the portion she had got of the six children which had been killed,
and which she had not eaten but laid aside. The other queens at once
perceived that their portions were dry, and could not therefore be
the parts of the child just born. The seventh queen told them that she
had made up her mind not to kill the child but to nurse it. The others
were glad to hear this, and they all said that they would help her in
nursing the child. So the child was suckled by seven mothers, and it
became after some years the hardiest and strongest boy that ever lived.

In the meantime the Rakshasi-wife of the king was doing infinite
mischief to the royal household and to the capital. What she ate at
the royal table did not fill her capacious stomach. She therefore,
in the darkness of night, gradually ate up all the members of the
royal family, all the king's servants and attendants, all his horses,
elephants, and cattle; till none remained in the palace except she
herself and her royal consort. After that she used to go out in
the evenings into the city and eat up a stray human being here and
there. The king was left unattended by servants; there was no person
left to cook for him, for no one would take his service. At last the
boy who had been suckled by seven mothers, and who had now grown up to
a stalwart youth, volunteered his services. He attended on the king,
and took every care to prevent the queen from swallowing him up, for
he went away home long before nightfall; and the Rakshasi-queen never
seized her victims except at night. Hence the queen determined in
some other way to get rid of the boy. As the boy always boasted that
he was equal to any work, however hard, the queen told him that she
was suffering from some disease which could be cured only by eating a
certain species of melon, which was twelve cubits long, but the stone
of which was thirteen cubits long, and that that fruit could be had
only from her mother, who lived on the other side of the ocean. She
gave him a letter of introduction to her mother, in which she requested
her to devour the boy the moment he put the letter into her hands. The
boy, suspecting foul play, tore up the letter and proceeded on his
journey. The dauntless youth passed through many lands, and at last
stood on the shore of the ocean, on the other side of which was the
country of the Rakshasis. He then bawled as loud as he could, and
said, "Granny! granny! come and save your daughter; she is dangerously
ill." An old Rakshasi on the other side of the ocean heard the words,
crossed the ocean, came to the boy, and on hearing the message took the
boy on her back and re-crossed the ocean. So the boy was in the country
of the Rakshasis. The twelve-cubit melon with its thirteen-cubit stone
was given to the boy at once, and he was told to perform the journey
back. But the boy pleaded fatigue, and begged to be allowed to rest
one day. To this the old Rakshasi consented. Observing a stout club
and a rope hanging in the Rakshasi's room, the boy inquired what
they were there for. She replied, "Child, by that club and rope I
cross the ocean. If any one takes the club and the rope in his hands,
and addresses them in the following magical words--


           "O stout club! O strong rope!
            Take me at once to the other side,"


then immediately the club and rope will take him to the other side
of the ocean." Observing a bird in a cage hanging in one corner of
the room, the boy inquired what it was. The old Rakshasi replied,
"It contains a secret, child, which must not be disclosed to mortals,
and yet how can I hide it from my own grandchild? That bird, child,
contains the life of your mother. If the bird is killed, your mother
will at once die." Armed with these secrets, the boy went to bed that
night. Next morning the old Rakshasi, together with all the other
Rakshasis, went to distant countries for forage. The boy took down
the cage from the ceiling, as well as the club and rope. Having well
secured the bird, he addressed the club and rope thus--


           "O stout club! O strong rope!
            Take me at once to the other side."


In the twinkling of an eye the boy was put on this side of the
ocean. He then retraced his steps, came to the queen, and gave her,
to her astonishment, the twelve-cubit melon with its thirteen-cubit
stone; but the cage with the bird in it he kept carefully concealed.

In the course of time the people of the city came to the king and said,
"A monstrous bird comes out apparently from the palace every evening,
and seizes the passengers in the streets and swallows them up. This
has been going on for so long a time that the city has become almost
desolate." The king could not make out what this monstrous bird
was. The king's servant, the boy, replied that he knew the monstrous
bird, and that he would kill it provided the queen stood beside
the king. By royal command the queen was made to stand beside the
king. The boy then took the bird from the cage which he had brought
from the other side of the ocean, on seeing which she fell into a
fainting fit. Turning to the king the boy said, "Sire, you will soon
perceive who the monstrous bird is that devours your subjects every
evening. As I tear off each limb of this bird, the corresponding limb
of the man-devourer will fall off." The boy then tore off one leg of
the bird in his hand; immediately, to the astonishment of the whole
assembly, for the citizens were all present, one of the legs of the
queen fell off. And when the boy squeezed the throat of the bird,
the queen gave up the ghost. The boy then related his own history
and that of his mother and his stepmothers. The seven queens, whose
eyesight was miraculously restored, were brought back to the palace;
and the boy that was suckled by seven mothers was recognised by the
king as his rightful heir. So they lived together happily.


            Thus my story endeth,
            The Natiya-thorn withereth, &c.







VIII

THE STORY OF PRINCE SOBUR


Once upon a time there lived a certain merchant who had seven
daughters. One day the merchant put to his daughters the question:
"By whose fortune do you get your living?" The eldest daughter
answered--"Papa, I get my living by your fortune." The same answer
was given by the second daughter, the third, the fourth, the fifth,
and the sixth; but his youngest daughter said--"I get my living by my
own fortune." The merchant got very angry with the youngest daughter,
and said to her--"As you are so ungrateful as to say that you get
your living by your own fortune, let me see how you fare alone. This
very day you shall leave my house without a pice in your pocket." He
forthwith called his palki-bearers, and ordered them to take away the
girl and leave her in the midst of a forest. The girl begged hard to
be allowed to take with her her work-box containing her needles and
threads. She was allowed to do so. She then got into the palki, which
the bearers lifted on their shoulders. The bearers had not gone many
hundred yards to the tune of "Hoon! hoon! hoon! hoon! hoon! hoon!" when
an old woman bawled out to them and bid them stop. On coming up to
the palki, she said, "Where are you taking away my daughter?" for she
was the nurse of the merchant's youngest child. The bearers replied,
"The merchant has ordered us to take her away and leave her in the
midst of a forest; and we are going to do his bidding." "I must go with
her," said the old woman. "How will you be able to keep pace with us,
as we must needs run?" said the bearers. "Anyhow I must go where my
daughter goes," rejoined the old woman. The upshot was that, at the
entreaty of the merchant's youngest daughter, the old woman was put
inside the palki along with her. In the afternoon the palki-bearers
reached a dense forest. They went far into it; and towards sunset
they put down the girl and the old woman at the foot of a large tree,
and retraced their steps homewards.

The case of the merchant's youngest daughter was truly pitiable. She
was scarcely fourteen years old; she had been bred in the lap of
luxury; and she was now here at sundown in the heart of what seemed
an interminable forest, with not a penny in her pocket, and with no
other protection than what could be given her by an old, decrepit,
imbecile woman. The very trees of the forest looked upon her with
pity. The gigantic tree, at whose foot she was mingling her tears
with those of the old woman, said to her (for trees could speak in
those days)--"Unhappy girl! I much pity you. In a short time the wild
beasts of the forest will come out of their lairs and roam about for
their prey; and they are sure to devour you and your companion. But
I can help you; I will make an opening for you in my trunk. When you
see the opening go into it; I will then close it up; and you will
remain safe inside; nor can the wild beasts touch you." In a moment
the trunk of the tree was split into two. The merchant's daughter
and the old woman went inside the hollow, on which the tree resumed
its natural shape. When the shades of night darkened the forest the
wild beasts came out of their lairs. The fierce tiger was there; the
wild bear was there; the hard-skinned rhinoceros was there; the bushy
bear was there; the musty elephant was there; and the horned buffalo
was there. They all growled round about the tree, for they got the
scent of human blood. The merchant's daughter and the old woman heard
from within the tree the growl of the beasts. The beasts came dashing
against the tree; they broke its branches; they pierced its trunk with
their horns; they scratched its bark with their claws: but in vain. The
merchant's daughter and her old nurse were safe within. Towards dawn
the wild beasts went away. After sunrise the good tree said to her two
inmates, "Unhappy women, the wild beasts have gone into their lairs
after greatly tormenting me. The sun is up; you can now come out." So
saying the tree split itself into two, and the merchant's daughter
and the old woman came out. They saw the extent of the mischief done
by the wild beasts to the tree. Many of its branches had been broken
down; in many places the trunk had been pierced; and in other places
the bark had been stripped off. The merchant's daughter said to the
tree, "Good mother, you are truly good to give us shelter at such
a fearful cost. You must be in great pain from the torture to which
the wild beasts subjected you last night." So saying she went to the
tank which was near the tree, and bringing thence a quantity of mud,
she besmeared the trunk with it, especially those parts which had
been pierced and scratched. After she had done this, the tree said,
"Thank you, my good girl, I am now greatly relieved of my pain. I am,
however, concerned not so much about myself as about you both. You
must be hungry, not having eaten the whole of yesterday. And what can I
give you? I have no fruit of my own to give you. Give to the old woman
whatever money you have, and let her go into the city hard by and
buy some food." They said they had no money. On searching, however,
in the work-box she found five cowries. [19] The tree then told the
old woman to go with the cowries to the city and buy some khai. [20]
The old woman went to the city, which was not far, and said to one
confectioner, "Please give me five cowries' worth of khai." The
confectioner laughed at her and said, "Be off, you old hag, do you
think khai can be had for five cowries?" She tried another shop,
and the shopkeeper, thinking the woman to be in great distress,
compassionately gave her a large quantity of khai for the five cowries.

When the old woman returned with the khai, the tree said to the
merchant's daughter, "Each of you eat a little of the khai, lay by
more than half, and strew the rest on the embankments of the tank all
round." They did as they were bidden, though they did not understand
the reason why they were told to scatter the khai on the sides of the
tank. They spent the day in bewailing their fate, and at night they
were housed inside the trunk of the tree as on the previous night. The
wild beasts came as before, further mutilated the tree, and tortured
it as in the preceding night. But during the night a scene was being
enacted on the embankments of the tank of which the two women saw the
outcome only on the following morning. Hundreds of peacocks of gorgeous
plumes came to the embankments to eat the khai which had been strewed
on them; and as they strove with each other for the tempting food
many of their plumes fell off their bodies. Early in the morning the
tree told the two women to gather the plumes together, out of which
the merchant's daughter made a beautiful fan. This fan was taken into
the city to the palace, where the son of the king admired it greatly
and paid for it a large sum of money. As each morning a quantity of
plumes was collected, every day one fan was made and sold. So that
in a short time the two women got rich. The tree then advised them
to employ men in building a house for them to live in. Accordingly
bricks were burnt, trees were cut down for beams and rafters, bricks
were reduced to powder, lime was manufactured, and in a few months
a stately, palace-like house was built for the merchant's daughter
and her old nurse. It was thought advisable to lay out the adjoining
grounds as a garden, and to dig a tank for supplying them with water.

In the meantime the merchant himself with his wife and six daughters
had been frowned upon by the goddess of wealth. By a sudden stroke of
misfortune he lost all his money, his house and property were sold,
and he, his wife, and six daughters, were turned adrift penniless into
the world. It so happened that they lived in a village not far from the
place where the two strange women had built a palace and were digging
a tank. As the once rich merchant was now supporting his family by
the pittance which he obtained every day for his manual labour, he
bethought himself of employing himself as a day labourer in digging
the tank of the strange lady on the skirts of the forest. His wife
said she would also go to dig the tank with him. So one day while
the strange lady was amusing herself from the window of her palace
with looking at the labourers digging her tank, to her utter surprise
she saw her father and mother coming towards the palace, apparently
to engage themselves as day labourers. Tears ran down her cheeks as
she looked at them, for they were clothed in rags. She immediately
sent servants to bring them inside the house. The poor man and woman
were frightened beyond measure. They saw that the tank was all ready;
and as it was customary in those days to offer a human sacrifice when
the digging was over, they thought that they were called inside in
order to be sacrificed. Their fears increased when they were told to
throw away their rags and to put on fine clothes which were given to
them. The strange lady of the palace, however, soon dispelled their
fears; for she told them that she was their daughter, fell on their
necks and wept. The rich daughter related her adventures, and the
father felt she was right when she said that she lived upon her own
fortune and not on that of her father. She gave her father a large
fortune, which enabled him to go to the city in which he formerly
lived, and to set himself up again as a merchant.

The merchant now bethought himself of going in his ship to distant
countries for purposes of trade. All was ready. He got on board,
ready to start, but, strange to say, the ship would not move. The
merchant was at a loss what to make of this. At last the idea occurred
to him that he had asked each of his six daughters, who were living
with him, what thing she wished he should bring for her; but he had
not asked that question of his seventh daughter who had made him
rich. He therefore immediately despatched a messenger to his youngest
daughter, asking her what she wished her father to bring for her on
his return from his mercantile travels. When the messenger arrived
she was engaged in her devotions, and hearing that a messenger had
arrived from her father she said to him "Sobur," meaning "wait." The
messenger understood that she wanted her father to bring for her
something called Sobur. He returned to the merchant and told him that
she wanted him to bring for her Sobur. The ship now moved of itself,
and the merchant started on his travels. He visited many ports,
and by selling his goods obtained immense profit. The things his
six daughters wanted him to bring for them he easily got, but Sobur,
the thing which he understood his youngest daughter wished to have,
he could get nowhere. He asked at every port whether Sobur could be
had there, but the merchants all told him that they had never heard
of such an article of commerce. At the last port he went through the
streets bawling out--"Wanted Sobur! wanted Sobur!" The cry attracted
the notice of the son of the king of that country whose name was
Sobur. The prince, hearing from the merchant that his daughter wanted
Sobur, said that he had the article in question, and bringing out a
small box of wood containing a magical fan with a looking-glass in
it, said--"This is Sobur which your daughter wishes to have." The
merchant having obtained the long-wished-for Sobur weighed anchor,
and sailed for his native land. On his arrival he sent to his youngest
daughter the said wonderful box. The daughter, thinking it to be a
common wooden box, laid it aside. Some days after when she was at
leisure she bethought herself of opening the box which her father
had sent her. When she opened it she saw in it a beautiful fan,
and in it a looking-glass. As she shook the fan, in a moment the
Prince Sobur stood before her, and said--"You called me, here I
am. What's your wish?" The merchant's daughter, astonished at the
sudden appearance of a prince of such exquisite beauty, asked who he
was, and how he had made his appearance there. The prince told her
of the circumstances under which he gave the box to her father, and
informed her of the secret that whenever the fan would be shaken he
would make his appearance. The prince lived for a day or two in the
house of the merchant's daughter, who entertained him hospitably. The
upshot was, that they fell in love with each other, and vowed to
each other to be husband and wife. The prince returned to his royal
father and told him that he had selected a wife for himself. The
day for the wedding was fixed. The merchant and his six daughters
were invited. The nuptial knot was tied. But there was death in the
marriage-bed. The six daughters of the merchant, envying the happy
lot of their youngest sister, had determined to put an end to the
life of her newly-wedded husband. They broke several bottles, reduced
the broken pieces into fine powder, and scattered it profusely on the
bed. The prince, suspecting no danger, laid himself down in the bed;
but he had scarcely been there two minutes when he felt acute pain
through his whole system, for the fine bottle-powder had gone through
every pore of his body. As the prince became restless through pain,
and was shrieking aloud, his attendants hastily took him away to his
own country.

The king and queen, the parents of Prince Sobur, consulted all the
physicians and surgeons of the kingdom; but in vain. The young prince
was day and night screaming with pain, and no one could ascertain
the disease, far less give him relief. The grief of the merchant's
daughter may be imagined. The marriage knot had been scarcely tied
when her husband was attacked, as she thought, by a terrible disease
and carried away many hundreds of miles off. Though she had never seen
her husband's country she determined to go there and nurse him. She
put on the garb of a Sannyasi, and with a dagger in her hand set
out on her journey. Of tender years, and unaccustomed to make long
journeys on foot, she soon got weary and sat under a tree to rest. On
the top of the tree was the nest of the divine bird Bihangama and
his mate Bihangami. They were not in their nest at the time, but two
of their young ones were in it. Suddenly the young ones on the top
of the tree gave a scream which roused the half-drowsy merchant's
daughter whom we shall now call the young Sannyasi. He saw near
him a huge serpent raising its hood and about to climb into the
tree. In a moment he cut the serpent into two, on which the young
birds left off screaming. Shortly after the Bihangama and Bihangami
came sailing through the air; and the latter said to the former--"I
suppose our offspring as usual have been devoured by our great enemy
the serpent. Ah me! I do not hear the cries of my young ones." On
nearing the nest, however, they were agreeably surprised to find
their offspring alive. The young ones told their dams how the young
Sannyasi under the tree had destroyed the serpent. And sure enough
the snake was lying there cut into two.

The Bihangami then said to her mate--"The young Sannyasi has saved
our offspring from death, I wish we could do him some service in
return." The Bihangama replied, "We shall presently do her service,
for the person under the tree is not a man but a woman. She got married
only last night to Prince Sobur, who, a few hours after, when jumping
into his bed, had every pore of his body pierced with fine particles
of ground bottles which had been spread over his bed by his envious
sisters-in-law. He is still suffering pain in his native land, and,
indeed, is at the point of death. And his heroic bride taking the garb
of a Sannyasi is going to nurse him." "But," asked the Bihangami, "is
there no cure for the prince?" "Yes, there is," replied the Bihangama:
"if our dung which is lying on the ground round about, and which is
hardened, be reduced to powder, and applied by means of a brush to
the body of the prince after bathing him seven times with seven jars
of water and seven jars of milk, Prince Sobur will undoubtedly get
well." "But," asked the Bihangami, "how can the poor daughter of the
merchant walk such a distance? It must take her many days, by which
time the poor prince will have died." "I can," replied the Bihangama,
"take the young lady on my back, and put her in the capital of Prince
Sobur, and bring her back, provided she does not take any presents
there." The merchant's daughter, in the garb of a Sannyasi, heard
this conversation between the two birds, and begged the Bihangama
to take her on his back. To this the bird readily consented. Before
mounting on her aerial car she gathered a quantity of birds' dung
and reduced it to fine powder. Armed with this potent drug she got
up on the back of the kind bird, and sailing through the air with the
rapidity of lightning, soon reached the capital of Prince Sobur. The
young Sannyasi went up to the gate of the palace, and sent word to
the king that he was acquainted with potent drugs and would cure the
prince in a few hours. The king, who had tried all the best doctors
in the kingdom without success, looked upon the Sannyasi as a mere
pretender, but on the advice of his councillors agreed to give him
a trial. The Sannyasi ordered seven jars of water and seven jars of
milk to be brought to him. He poured the contents of all the jars on
the body of the prince. He then applied, by means of a feather, the
dung-powder he had already prepared to every pore of the prince's
body. Thereafter seven jars of water and seven jars of milk were
again six times poured upon him. When the prince's body was wiped,
he felt perfectly well. The king ordered that the richest treasures
he had should be presented to the wonderful doctor; but the Sannyasi
refused to take any. He only wanted a ring from the prince's finger to
preserve as a memorial. The ring was readily given him. The merchant's
daughter hastened to the sea-shore where the Bihangama was awaiting
her. In a moment they reached the tree of the divine birds. Hence
the young bride walked to her house on the skirts of the forest. The
following day she shook the magical fan, and forthwith Prince Sobur
appeared before her. When the lady showed him the ring, he learnt with
infinite surprise that his own wife was the doctor that cured him. The
prince took away his bride to his palace in his far-off kingdom,
forgave his sisters-in-law, lived happily for scores of years, and
was blessed with children, grandchildren, and great-grandchildren.


            Thus my story endeth,
            The Natiya-thorn withereth, etc.







IX

THE ORIGIN OF OPIUM [21]


Once on a time there lived on the banks of the holy Ganga a Rishi,
[22] who spent his days and nights in the performance of religious
rites and in meditation upon God. From sunrise to sunset he sat on the
river bank engaged in devotion, and at night he took shelter in a hut
of palm-leaves which his own hand had raised in a bush hard by. There
were no men and women for miles round. In the hut, however, there was a
mouse, which used to live upon the leavings of the Rishi's supper. As
it was not in the nature of the sage to hurt any living thing, our
mouse never ran away from him, but, on the contrary, went to him,
touched his feet, and played with him. The Rishi, partly in kindness to
the little brute, and partly to have some one by to talk to at times,
gave the mouse the power of speech. One night the mouse, standing on
its hind-legs and joining together its fore-legs reverently, said to
the Rishi, "Holy sage, you have been so kind as to give me the power
to speak like men. If it will not displease your reverence, I have one
more boon to ask." "What is it?" said the Rishi. "What is it, little
mousie? Say what you want." The mouse answered--"When your reverence
goes in the day to the river-side for devotion, a cat comes to the
hut to catch me. And had it not been for fear of your reverence, the
cat would have eaten me up long ago; and I fear it will eat me some
day. My prayer is that I may be changed into a cat that I may prove a
match for my foe." The Rishi became propitious to the mouse, and threw
some holy water on its body, and it was at once changed into a cat.

Some nights after, the Rishi asked his pet, "Well, little puss,
how do you like your present life?" "Not much, your reverence,"
answered the cat. "Why not?" demanded the sage. "Are you not strong
enough to hold your own against all the cats in the world?" "Yes,"
rejoined the cat. "Your reverence has made me a strong cat, able to
cope with all the cats in the world. But I do not now fear cats; I
have got a new foe. Whenever your reverence goes to the river-side,
a pack of dogs comes to the hut, and sets up such a loud barking
that I am frightened out of my life. If your reverence will not be
displeased with me, I beg you to change me into a dog." The Rishi said,
"Be turned into a dog," and the cat forthwith became a dog.

Some days passed, when one night the dog said thus to the Rishi:
"I cannot thank your reverence enough for your kindness to me. I was
but a poor mouse, and you not only gave me speech but turned me into a
cat; and again you were kind enough to change me into a dog. As a dog,
however, I suffer a great deal of trouble, I do not get enough food:
my only food is the leavings of your supper, but that is not sufficient
to fill the maw of such a large beast as you have made me. O how I
envy those apes who jump about from tree to tree, and eat all sorts
of delicious fruits! If your reverence will not get angry with me,
I pray that I be changed into an ape." The kind-hearted sage readily
granted his pet's wish, and the dog became an ape.

Our ape was at first wild with joy. He leaped from one tree to
another, and sucked every luscious fruit he could find. But his
joy was short-lived. Summer came on with its drought. As a monkey
he found it hard to drink water out of a river or of a pool; and
he saw the wild boars splashing in the water all the day long. He
envied their lot, and exclaimed, "O how happy those boars are! All
day their bodies are cooled and refreshed by water. I wish I were a
boar." Accordingly at night he recounted to the Rishi the troubles of
the life of an ape and the pleasures of that of a boar, and begged
of him to change him into a boar. The sage, whose kindness knew no
bounds, complied with his pet's request, and turned him into a wild
boar. For two whole days our boar kept his body soaking wet, and on
the third day, as he was splashing about in his favourite element,
whom should he see but the king of the country riding on a richly
caparisoned elephant. The king was out hunting, and it was only by a
lucky chance that our boar escaped being bagged. He dwelt in his own
mind on the dangers attending the life of a wild boar, and envied the
lot of the stately elephant who was so fortunate as to carry about
the king of the country on his back. He longed to be an elephant,
and at night besought the Rishi to make him one.

Our elephant was roaming about in the wilderness, when he saw the king
out hunting. The elephant went towards the king's suite with the view
of being caught. The king, seeing the elephant at a distance, admired
it on account of its beauty, and gave orders that it should be caught
and tamed. Our elephant was easily caught, and taken into the royal
stables, and was soon tamed. It so chanced that the queen expressed
a wish to bathe in the waters of the holy Ganga. The king, who wished
to accompany his royal consort, ordered that the newly-caught elephant
should be brought to him. The king and queen mounted on his back. One
would suppose that the elephant had now got his wishes, as the king
had mounted on his back. But no. There was a fly in the ointment. The
elephant, who looked upon himself as a lordly beast, could not brook
the idea that a woman, though a queen, should ride on his back. He
thought himself degraded. He jumped up so violently that both the
king and queen fell to the ground. The king carefully picked up the
queen, took her in his arms, asked her whether she had been much
hurt, wiped off the dust from her clothes with his handkerchief, and
tenderly kissed her a hundred times. Our elephant, after witnessing
the king's caresses, scampered off to the woods as fast as his legs
could carry him. As he ran he thought within himself thus: "After
all, I see that a queen is the happiest of all creatures. Of what
infinite regard is she the object! The king lifted her up, took her
in his arms, made many tender inquiries, wiped off the dust from her
clothes with his own royal hands, and kissed her a hundred times! O
the happiness of being a queen! I must tell the Rishi to make me a
queen!" So saying the elephant, after traversing the woods, went at
sunset to the Rishi's hut, and fell prostrate on the ground at the feet
of the holy sage. The Rishi said, "Well, what's the news? Why have
you left the king's stud?" "What shall I say to your reverence? You
have been very kind to me; you have granted every wish of mine. I
have one more boon to ask, and it will be the last. By becoming an
elephant I have got only my bulk increased, but not my happiness. I
see that of all creatures a queen is the happiest in the world. Do,
holy father, make me a queen." "Silly child," answered the Rishi,
"how can I make you a queen? Where can I get a kingdom for you,
and a royal husband to boot? All I can do is to change you into an
exquisitely beautiful girl, possessed of charms to captivate the
heart of a prince, if ever the gods grant you an interview with some
great prince! "Our elephant agreed to the change; and in a moment the
sagacious beast was transformed into a beautiful young lady, to whom
the holy sage gave the name of Postomani, or the poppy-seed lady.

Postomani lived in the Rishi's hut, and spent her time in tending
the flowers and watering the plants. One day, as she was sitting at
the door of the hut during the Rishi's absence, she saw a man dressed
in a very rich garb come towards the cottage. She stood up and asked
the stranger who he was, and what he had come there for. The stranger
answered that he had come a-hunting in those parts, that he had been
chasing in vain a deer, that he felt thirsty, and that he came to
the hut of the hermit for refreshment.

Postomani. Stranger, look upon this cot as your own house. I'll do
everything I can to make you comfortable; I am only sorry we are too
poor suitably to entertain, a man of your rank, for if I mistake not
you are the king of this country.

The king smiled. Postomani then brought out a water-pot, and made
as if she would wash the feet of her royal guest with her own hands,
when the king said, "Holy maid, do not touch my feet, for I am only
a Kshatriya, and you are the daughter of a holy sage."

Postomani. Noble sir, I am not the daughter of the Rishi, neither
am I a Brahmani girl; so there can be no harm in my touching your
feet. Besides, you are my guest, and I am bound to wash your feet.

King. Forgive my impertinence. What caste do you belong to?

Postomani. I have heard from the sage that my parents were Kshatriyas.

King. May I ask you whether your father was a king, for your uncommon
beauty and your stately demeanour show that you are a born princess.

Postomani, without answering the question, went inside the hut,
brought out a tray of the most delicious fruits, and set it before the
king. The king, however, would not touch the fruits till the maid had
answered his questions. When pressed hard Postomani gave the following
answer: "The holy sage says that my father was a king. Having been
overcome in battle, he, along with my mother, fled into the woods. My
poor father was eaten up by a tiger, and my mother at that time was
brought to bed of me, and she closed her eyes as I opened mine. Strange
to say, there was a bee-hive on the tree at the foot of which I lay;
drops of honey fell into my mouth and kept alive the spark of life
till the kind Rishi found me and brought me into his hut. This is
the simple story of the wretched girl who now stands before the king."

King. Call not yourself wretched. You are the loveliest and most
beautiful of women. You would adorn the palace of the mightiest
sovereign.

The upshot was, that the king made love to the girl and they were
joined in marriage by the Rishi. Postomani was treated as the favourite
queen, and the former queen was in disgrace. Postomani's happiness,
however, was short-lived. One day as she was standing by a well,
she became giddy, fell into the water, and died. The Rishi then
appeared before the king and said: "O king, grieve not over the
past. What is fixed by fate must come to pass. The queen, who has
just been drowned, was not of royal blood. She was born a mouse; I
then changed her successively, according to her own wish, into a cat,
a dog, an ape, a boar, an elephant, and a beautiful girl. Now that
she is gone, do you again take into favour your former queen. As
for my reputed daughter, through the favour of the gods I'll make
her name immortal. Let her body remain in the well; fill the well up
with earth. Out of her flesh and bones will grow a tree which shall
be called after her Posto, that is, the Poppy tree. From this tree
will be obtained a drug called opium, which will be celebrated as a
powerful medicine through all ages, and which will always be either
swallowed or smoked as a wonderful narcotic to the end of time. The
opium swallower or smoker will have one quality of each of the animals
to which Postomani was transformed. He will be mischievous like a
mouse, fond of milk like a cat, quarrelsome like a dog, filthy like
an ape, savage like a boar, and high-tempered like a queen."


            Thus my story endeth,
            The Natiya-thorn withereth, etc.







X

STRIKE BUT HEAR


Once upon a time there reigned a king who had three sons. His subjects
one day came to him and said, "O incarnation of justice! the kingdom
is infested with thieves and robbers. Our property is not safe. We
pray your majesty to catch hold of these thieves and punish them." The
king said to his sons, "O my sons, I am old, but you are all in the
prime of manhood. How is it that my kingdom is full of thieves? I
look to you to catch hold of these thieves." The three princes then
made up their minds to patrol the city every night. With this view
they set up a station in the outskirts of the city, where they kept
their horses. In the early part of the night the eldest prince rode
upon his horse and went through the whole city, but did not see a
single thief. He came back to the station. About midnight the second
prince got upon his horse and rode through every part of the city,
but he did not see or hear of a single thief. He came also back to
the station. Some hours after midnight the youngest prince went the
rounds, and when he came near the gate of the palace where his father
lived, he saw a beautiful woman coming out of the palace. The prince
accosted the woman, and asked who she was and where she was going
at that hour of the night. The woman answered, "I am Rajlakshmi,
[23] the guardian deity of this palace. The king will be killed this
night. I am therefore not needed here. I am going away." The prince
did not know what to make of this message. After a moment's reflection
he said to the goddess, "But suppose the king is not killed to-night,
then have you any objection to return to the palace and stay there?" "I
have no objection," replied the goddess. The prince then begged the
goddess to go in, promising to do his best to prevent the king from
being killed. Then the goddess entered the palace again, and in a
moment went the prince knew not whither.

The prince went straight into the bedroom of his royal father. There he
lay immersed in deep sleep. His second and young wife, the stepmother
of our prince, was sleeping in another bed in the room. A light
was burning dimly. What was his surprise when the prince saw a huge
cobra going round and round the golden bedstead on which his father
was sleeping. The prince with his sword cut the serpent in two. Not
satisfied with killing the cobra, he cut it up into a hundred pieces,
and put them inside the pan dish [24] which was in the room. While the
prince was cutting up the serpent a drop of blood fell on the breast
of his stepmother who was sleeping hard by. The prince was in great
distress. He said to himself, "I have saved my father but killed my
mother." How was the drop of blood to be taken out of his mother's
breast? He wrapped round his tongue a piece of cloth sevenfold, and
with it licked up the drop of blood. But while he was in the act of
doing this, his stepmother woke up, and opening her eyes saw that
it was her stepson, the youngest prince. The young prince rushed
out of the room. The queen, intending to ruin the youngest prince,
whom she hated, called out to her husband, "My lord, my lord, are
you awake? are you awake? Rouse yourself up. Here is a nice piece of
business." The king on awaking inquired what the matter was. "The
matter, my lord? Your worthy son, the youngest prince, of whom you
speak so highly, was just here. I caught him in the act of touching
my breast. Doubtless he came with a wicked intent. And this is your
worthy son!" The king was horror-struck. The prince went to the
station to his brothers, but told them nothing.

Early in the morning the king called his eldest son to him and said,
"If a man to whom I intrust my honour and my life prove faithless,
how should he be punished?" The eldest prince replied, "Doubtless such
a man's head should be cut off; but before you kill, you should see
whether the man is really faithless." "What do you mean?" inquired
the king. "Let your majesty be pleased to listen," answered the prince.

"Once on a time there lived a goldsmith who had a grown-up son. And
this son had a wife who had the rare faculty of understanding the
language of beasts; but neither her husband nor any one else knew
that she had this uncommon gift. One night she was lying in bed
beside her husband in their house, which was close to a river, when
she heard a jackal howl out, 'There goes a carcase floating on the
river; is there any one who will take off the diamond ring from the
finger of the dead man and give me the corpse to eat?' The woman
understood the jackal's language, got up from bed and went to the
river-side. The husband, who was not asleep, followed his wife at
some distance so as not to be observed by her. The woman went into
the water, tugged the floating corpse towards the shore, and saw the
diamond ring on the finger. Unable to loosen it with her hand, as the
fingers of the dead body had swelled, she bit it off with her teeth,
and put the dead body upon land. She then went to her bed, whither
she had been preceded by her husband. The young goldsmith lay beside
his wife almost petrified with fear, for he concluded after what he
saw that his wife was not a human being but a Rakshasi. He spent the
rest of the night in tossing in his bed, and early in the morning
spoke to his father in the following manner: 'Father, the woman whom
thou hast given me to wife is not a real woman but a Rakshasi. Last
night as I was lying in bed with her, I heard outside the house,
towards the river-side, a jackal set up a fearful howl. On this she,
thinking that I was asleep, got up from bed, opened the door, and
went out to the river-side. Surprised to see her go out alone at
the dead hour of night, I suspected evil and followed her, but so
that she could not see me. What did she do, do you think? O horror of
horrors! She went into the stream, dragged towards the shore the dead
body of a man which was floating by, and began to eat it! I saw this
with mine own eyes. I then returned home while she was feasting upon
the carcase, and jumped into bed. In a few minutes she also returned,
bolted the door, and lay beside me. O my father, how can I live with
a Rakshasi? She will certainly kill me and eat me up one night.' The
old goldsmith was not a little shocked to hear this account. Both
father and son agreed that the woman should be taken into the forest
and there left to be devoured by wild beasts. Accordingly the young
goldsmith spoke to his wife thus: 'My dear love, you had better not
cook much this morning; only boil rice and burn a brinjal, for I must
take you to-day to see your father and mother, who are dying to see
you.' At the mention of her father's house she became full of joy,
and finished the cooking in no time. The husband and wife snatched a
hasty breakfast and started on their journey. The way lay through a
dense jungle, in which the goldsmith bethought himself of leaving his
wife alone to be eaten up by wild beasts. But while they were passing
through this jungle the woman heard a serpent hiss, the meaning of
which hissing, as understood by her, was as follows: 'O passer-by, how
thankful should I be to you if you would catch hold of that croaking
frog in yonder hole, which is full of gold and precious stones,
and give me the frog to swallow, and you take the gold and precious
stones.' The woman forthwith made for the frog, and began digging
the hole with a stick. The young goldsmith was now quaking with fear,
thinking his Rakshasi-wife was about to kill him. She called out to
him and said, 'Husband, take up all this large quantity of gold and
these precious stones.' The goldsmith, not knowing what to make of it,
timidly went to the place, and to his infinite surprise saw the gold
and the precious stones. They took up as much as they could. On the
husband's asking his wife how she came to know of the existence of all
this riches, she said that she understood the language of animals,
and that the snake coiled up hard by had informed her of it. The
goldsmith, on finding out what an accomplished wife he was blessed
with, said to her, 'My love, it has got very late to-day; it would be
impossible to reach your father's house before nightfall, and we may
be devoured by wild beasts in the jungle; I propose therefore that
we both return home.' It took them a long time to reach home, for
they were laden with a large quantity of gold and precious stones. On
coming near the house, the goldsmith said to his wife, 'My dear, you
go by the back door, while I go by the front door and see my father
in his shop and show him all this gold and these precious stones.' So
she entered the house by the back door, and the moment she entered
she was met by the old goldsmith, who had come that minute into the
house for some purpose with a hammer in his hand. The old goldsmith,
when he saw his Rakshasi daughter-in-law, concluded in his mind that
she had killed and swallowed up his son. He therefore struck her on
the head with the hammer, and she immediately died. That moment the
son came into the house, but it was too late. Hence it is that I told
your majesty that before you cut off a man's head you should inquire
whether the man is really guilty."

The king then called his second son to him, and said, "If a man to
whom I intrust my honour and my life prove faithless, how should he
be punished?" The second prince replied, "Doubtless such a man's head
should be cut off, but before you kill you should see whether the
man is really faithless." "What do you mean?" inquired the king. "Let
your majesty be pleased to listen," answered the prince.

"Once on a time there reigned a king who was very fond of going out
a-hunting. Once while he was out hunting his horse took him into
a dense forest far from his followers. He rode on and on, and did
not see either villages or towns. He became very thirsty, but he
could see neither pond, lake, nor stream. At last he found something
dripping from the top of a tree. Concluding it to be rain-water which
had rested in some cavity of the tree, he stood on horseback under
the tree and caught the dripping contents in a small cup. It was,
however, no rain-water. A huge cobra, which was on the top of the
tree, was dashing in rage its fangs against the tree; and its poison
was coming out and was falling in drops. The king, however, thought
it was rain-water; though his horse knew better. When the cup was
nearly filled with the liquid snake-poison, and the king was about
to drink it off, the horse, to save the life of his royal master,
so moved about that the cup fell from the king's hand and all the
liquid spilled about. The king became very angry with his horse,
and with his sword gave a cut to the horse's neck, and the horse died
immediately. Hence it is that I told your majesty that before you cut
off a man's head you should inquire whether the man is really guilty."

The king then called to him his third and youngest son, and said,
"If a man to whom I intrust my honour and my life prove faithless,
how should he be punished?" The youngest prince replied, "Doubtless
such a man's head should be cut off, but before you kill you should
see whether the man is really faithless." "What do you mean?" inquired
the king. "Let your majesty be pleased to listen," answered the prince.

"Once on a time there reigned a king who had in his palace a remarkable
bird of the Suka species. One day as the Suka went out to the fields
for an airing, he saw his dad and dam, who pressed him to come and
spend some days with them in their nest in some far-off land. The
Suka answered he would be very happy to come, but he could not go
without the king's leave; he added that he would speak to the king
that very day, and would be ready to go the following morning if his
dad and dam would come to that very spot. The Suka spoke to the king,
and the king gave leave with reluctance as he was very fond of the
bird. So the next morning the Suka met his dad and dam at the place
appointed, and went with them to his paternal nest on the top of some
high tree in a far-off land. The three birds lived happily together
for a fortnight, at the end of which period the Suka said to his
dad and dam, 'My beloved parents, the king granted me leave only
for a fortnight, and to-day the fortnight is over: to-morrow I must
start for the city of the king.' His dad and dam readily agreed to the
reasonable proposal, and told him to take a present to the king. After
laying their heads together for some time they agreed that the present
should be a fruit of the tree of Immortality. So early next morning
the Suka plucked a fruit off the tree of Immortality, and carefully
catching it in his beak, started on his aerial journey. As he had a
heavy weight to carry, the Suka was not able to reach the city of
the king that day, and was benighted on the road. He took shelter
in a tree, and was at a loss to know where to keep the fruit. If
he kept it in his beak it was sure, he thought, to fall out when he
fell asleep. Fortunately he saw a hole in the trunk of the tree in
which he had taken shelter, and accordingly put the fruit in it. It
so happened that in that hole there was a snake; in the course of the
night the snake darted its fangs on the fruit, and thus besmeared it
with its poison. Early before crow-cawing the Suka, suspecting nothing,
took up the fruit of Immortality in its beak, and began his aerial
voyage. The Suka reached the palace while the king was sitting with
his ministers. The king was delighted to see his pet bird come again,
and greatly admired the beautiful fruit which the Suka had brought as
a present. The fruit was very fair to look at; it was the loveliest
fruit in all the earth; and as its name implies it makes the eater
of it immortal. The king was going to eat it, but his courtiers said
that it was not advisable for the king to eat it, as it might be a
poisonous fruit. He accordingly threw it to a crow which was perched
on the wall; the crow ate a part of it; but in a moment the crow fell
down and died. The king, imagining that the Suka had intended to take
away his life, took hold of the bird and killed it. The king ordered
the stone of the deadly fruit, as it was thought to be, to be planted
in a garden outside the city. The stone in course of time became
a large tree bearing lovely fruit. The king ordered a fence to be
put round the tree, and placed a guard lest people should eat of the
fruit and die. There lived in that city an old Brahman and his wife,
who used to live upon charity. The Brahman one day mourned his hard
lot, and told his wife that instead of leading the wretched life of
a beggar he would eat the fruit of the poisonous tree in the king's
garden and thus end his days. So that very night he got up from his
bed in order to get into the king's garden. His wife, suspecting her
husband's intention, followed him, resolved also to eat of the fruit
and die with her husband. As at that dead hour of night the guard
was asleep, the old Brahman plucked a fruit and ate it. The woman
said to her husband, 'If you die what is the use of my life? I'll
also eat and die.' So saying she plucked a fruit and ate it. Thinking
that the poison would take some time to produce its due effect, they
both went home and lay in bed, supposing that they would never rise
again. To their infinite surprise next morning they found themselves
to be not only alive, but young and vigorous. Their neighbours could
scarcely recognise them--they had become so changed. The old Brahman
had become handsome and vigorous, no grey hairs, no wrinkles on his
cheeks; and as for his wife, she had become as beautiful as any lady
in the king's household. The king, hearing of this wonderful change,
sent for the old Brahman, who told him all the circumstances. The
king then greatly lamented the sad fate of his pet bird, and blamed
himself for having killed it without fully inquiring into the case.

"Hence it is," continued the youngest prince, "that I told your majesty
that before you cut off a man's head you should inquire whether the
man is really guilty. I know your majesty thinks that last night
I entered your chamber with wicked intent. Be pleased to hear me
before you strike. Last night as I was on my rounds I saw a female
figure come out of the palace. On challenging her she said that she
was Rajlakshmi, the guardian deity of the palace; and that she was
leaving the palace as the king would be killed that night. I told her
to come in, and that I would prevent the king from being killed. I
went straight into your bedroom, and saw a large cobra going round
and round your golden bedstead. I killed the cobra, cut it up into a
hundred pieces, and put them in the pan dish. But while I was cutting
up the snake, a drop of its blood fell on the breast of my mother;
and then I thought that while I had saved my father I had killed
my mother. I wrapped round my tongue a piece of cloth sevenfold
and licked up the drop of blood. While I was licking up the blood,
my mother opened her eyes and noticed me. This is what I have done;
now cut off my head if your majesty wishes it."

The king filled with joy and gratitude embraced his son, and from
that time loved him more even than he had loved him before.


            Thus my story endeth,
            The Natiya-thorn withereth, etc.







XI

THE ADVENTURES OF TWO THIEVES AND OF THEIR SONS


PART I

Once on a time there lived two thieves in a village who earned their
livelihood by stealing. As they were well-known thieves, every act
of theft in the village was ascribed to them whether they committed
it or not; they therefore left the village, and, being resolved to
support themselves by honest labour, went to a neighbouring town for
service. Both of them were engaged by a householder; the one had to
tend a cow, and the other to water a champaka plant. The elder thief
began watering the plant early in the morning, and as he had been
told to go on pouring water till some of it collected itself round
the foot of the plant he went on pouring bucketful after bucketful:
but to no purpose. No sooner was the water poured on the foot of the
plant than it was forthwith sucked up by the thirsty earth; and it
was late in the afternoon when the thief, tired with drawing water,
laid himself down on the ground, and fell asleep. The younger thief
fared no better. The cow which he had to tend was the most vicious
in the whole country. When taken out of the village for pasturage it
galloped away to a great distance with its tail erect; it ran from one
paddy-field to another, and ate the corn and trod upon it; it entered
into sugar-cane plantations and destroyed the sweet cane;--for all
which damage and acts of trespass the neat-herd was soundly rated by
the owners of the fields. What with running after the cow from field
to field, from pool to pool; what with the abusive language poured
not only upon him, but upon his forefathers up to the fourteenth
generation, by the owners of the fields in which the corn had been
destroyed,--the younger thief had a miserable day of it. After a
world of trouble he succeeded about sunset in catching hold of the
cow, which he brought back to the house of his master. The elder
thief had just roused himself from sleep when he saw the younger one
bringing in the cow. Then the elder said to the younger--"Brother,
why are you so late in coming from the fields?"

Younger. What shall I say, brother? I took the cow to that part of the
meadow where there is a tank, near which there is a large tree. I let
the cow loose, and it began to graze about without giving the least
trouble. I spread my gamchha [25] upon the grass under the tree;
and there was such a delicious breeze that I soon fell asleep, and
I did not wake till after sunset; and when I awoke I saw my good cow
grazing contentedly at the distance of a few paces. But how did you
fare, brother?

Elder. Oh, as for me, I had a jolly time of it. I had poured only
one bucketful of water on the plant, when a large quantity rested
round it. So my work was done, and I had the whole day to myself. I
laid myself down on the ground; I meditated on the joys of this new
mode of life; I whistled; I sang; and at last fell asleep. And I am
up only this moment.

When this talk was ended, the elder thief, believing that what the
younger thief had said was true, thought that tending the cow was more
comfortable than watering the plant; and the younger thief, for the
same reason, thought that watering the plant was more comfortable
than tending the cow: each therefore resolved to exchange his own
work for that of the other.

Elder. Well, brother, I have a wish to tend the cow. Suppose to-morrow
you take my work, and I yours. Have you any objection?

Younger. Not the slightest, brother. I shall be glad to take up your
work, and you are quite welcome to take up mine. Only let me give
you a bit of advice. I felt it rather uncomfortable to sleep nearly
the whole of the day on the bare ground. If you take a charpoy [26]
with you, you will have a merry time of it.

Early the following morning the elder thief went out with the cow to
the fields, not forgetting to take with him a charpoy for his ease and
comfort; and the younger thief began watering the plant. The latter
had thought that one bucketful, or at the outside two bucketfuls,
of water would be enough. But what was his surprise when he found
that even a hundred bucketfuls were not sufficient to saturate the
ground around the roots of the plant. He was dead tired with drawing
water. The sun was almost going down, and yet his work was not over. At
last he gave it up through sheer weariness.

The elder thief in the fields was in no better case. He took the
cow beside the tank which the younger thief had spoken of, put his
charpoy under the large tree hard by, and then let the cow loose. As
soon as the cow was let loose it went scampering about in the meadow,
jumping over hedges and ditches, running through paddy-fields, and
injuring sugar-cane plantations. The elder thief was not a little
put about. He had to run about the whole day, and to be insulted by
the people whose fields had been trespassed upon. But the worst of
it was, that our thief had to run about the meadow with the charpoy
on his head, for he could not put it anywhere for fear it should be
taken away. When the other neat-herds who were in the meadow saw the
elder thief running about in breathless haste after the cow with the
charpoy on his head, they clapped their hands and raised shouts of
derision. The poor fellow, hungry and angry, bitterly repented of
the exchange he had made. After infinite trouble, and with the help
of the other neat-herds, he at last caught hold of the precious cow,
and brought it home long after the village lamps had been lit.

When the two thieves met in the house of their master, they merely
laughed at each other without speaking a word. Their dinner over,
they laid themselves to rest, when there took place the following
conversation:--

Younger. Well, how did you fare, brother?

Elder. Just as you fared, and perhaps some degrees better.

Younger. I am of opinion that our former trade of thieving was
infinitely preferable to this sort of honest labour, as people call it.

Elder. What doubt is there of that? But, by the gods, I have never
seen a cow which can be compared to this. It has no second in the
world in point of viciousness.

Younger. A vicious cow is not a rare thing. I have seen some cows
as vicious. But have you ever seen a plant like this champaka plant
which you were told to water? I wonder what becomes of all the water
that is poured round about it. Is there a tank below its roots?

Elder. I have a good mind to dig round it and see what is beneath it.

Younger. We had better do so this night when the good man of the
house and his wife are asleep.

At about midnight the two thieves took spades and shovels and began
digging round the plant. After digging a good deal the younger thief
lighted upon some hard thing against which the shovel struck. The
curiosity of both was excited. The younger thief saw that it was
a large jar; he thrust his hand into it and found that it was full
of gold mohurs. But he said to the elder thief--"Oh, it is nothing;
it is only a large stone." The elder thief, however, suspected that
it was something else; but he took care not to give vent to his
suspicion. Both agreed to give up digging as they had found nothing;
and they went to sleep. An hour or two after, when the elder thief
saw that the younger thief was asleep, he quietly got up and went
to the spot which had been digged. He saw the jar filled with gold
mohurs. Digging a little near it, he found another jar also filled
with gold mohurs. Overjoyed to find the treasure, he resolved to secure
it. He took up both the jars, went to the tank which was near, and from
which water used to be drawn for the plant, and buried them in the mud
of its bank. He then returned to the house, and quietly laid himself
down beside the younger thief, who was then fast asleep. The younger
thief, who had first found the jar of gold mohurs, now woke, and softly
stealing out of bed, went to secure the treasure he had seen. On going
to the spot he did not see any jar; he therefore naturally thought
that his companion the elder thief had secreted it somewhere. He went
to his sleeping partner, with a view to discover if possible by any
marks on his body the place where the treasure had been hidden. He
examined the person of his friend with the eye of a detective, and
saw mud on his feet and near the ankles. He immediately concluded
the treasure must have been concealed somewhere in the tank. But in
what part of the tank? on which bank? His ingenuity did not forsake
him here. He walked round all the four banks of the tank. When he
walked round three sides, the frogs on them jumped into the water;
but no frogs jumped from the fourth bank. He therefore concluded that
the treasure must have been buried on the fourth bank. In a little
he found the two jars filled with gold mohurs; he took them up, and
going into the cow-house brought out the vicious cow he had tended,
and put the two jars on its back. He left the house and started for
his native village.

When the elder thief at crow-cawing got up from sleep, he was surprised
not to find his companion beside him. He hastened to the tank and
found that the jars were not there. He went to the cow-house, and did
not see the vicious cow. He immediately concluded the younger thief
must have run away with the treasure on the back of the cow. And where
could he think of going? He must be going to his native village. No
sooner did this process of reasoning pass through his mind than he
resolved forthwith to set out and overtake the younger thief. As
he passed through the town, he invested all the money he had in a
costly pair of shoes covered with gold lace. He walked very fast,
avoiding the public road and making short cuts. He descried the
younger thief trudging on slowly with his cow. He went before him
in the highway about a distance of 200 yards, and threw down on the
road one shoe. He walked on another 200 yards and threw the other
shoe at a place near which was a large tree; amid the thick leaves of
that tree he hid himself. The younger thief coming along the public
road saw the first shoe and said to himself--"What a beautiful shoe
that is! It is of gold lace. It would have suited me in my present
circumstances now that I have got rich. But what shall I do with one
shoe?" So he passed on. In a short time he came to the place where
the other shoe was lying. The younger thief said within himself--"Ah,
here is the other shoe! What a fool I was, that I did not pick up
the one I first saw! However it is not too late. I'll tie the cow to
yonder tree and go for the other shoe." He tied the cow to the tree,
and taking up the second shoe went for the first, lying at a distance
of about 200 yards. In the meantime the elder thief got down from
the tree, loosened the cow, and drove it towards his native village,
avoiding the king's highway. The younger thief on returning to the
tree found that the cow was gone. He of course concluded that it
could have been done only by the elder thief. He walked as fast as
his legs could carry him, and reached his native village long before
the elder thief with the cow. He hid himself near the door of the
elder thief's house. The moment the elder thief arrived with the
cow, the younger thief accosted him, saying--"So you are come safe,
brother. Let us go in and divide the money." To this proposal the
elder thief readily agreed. In the inner yard of the house the two
jars were taken down from the back of the cow; they went to a room,
bolted the door, and began dividing. Two mohurs were taken up by
the hand, one was put in one place, and the other in another; and
they went on doing that till the jars became empty. But last of all
one gold mohur remained. The question was--Who was to take it? Both
agreed that it should be changed the next morning, and the silver cash
equally divided. But with whom was the single mohur to remain? There
was not a little wrangling about the matter. After a great deal of yea
and nay, it was settled that it should remain with the elder thief,
and that next morning it should be changed and equally divided.

At night the elder thief said to his wife and the other women of
the house, "Look here, ladies, the younger thief will come to-morrow
morning to demand the share of the remaining gold mohur; but I don't
mean to give it to him. You do one thing to-morrow. Spread a cloth on
the ground in the yard. I will lay myself on the cloth pretending to
be dead; and to convince people that I am dead, put a tulasi [27]
plant near my head. And when you see the younger thief coming to
the door, you set up a loud cry and lamentation. Then he will of
course go away, and I shall not have to pay his share of the gold
mohur." To this proposal the women readily agreed. Accordingly the
next day, about noon, the elder thief laid himself down in the yard
like a corpse with the sacred basil near his head. When the younger
thief was seen coming near the house, the women set up a loud cry,
and when he came nearer and nearer, wondering what it all meant,
they said, "Oh, where did you both go? What did you bring? What
did you do to him? Look, he is dead!" So saying they rent the air
with their cries. The younger thief, seeing through the whole, said,
"Well, I am sorry my friend and brother is gone. I must now attend to
his funeral. You all go away from this place, you are but women. I'll
see to it that the remains are well burnt." He brought a quantity of
straw and twisted it into a rope, which he fastened to the legs of the
deceased man, and began tugging him, saying that he was going to take
him to the place of burning. While the elder thief was being dragged
through the streets, his body was getting dreadfully scratched and
bruised, but he held his peace, being resolved to act his part out,
and thus escape giving the share of the gold mohur. The sun had
gone down when the younger thief with the corpse reached the place
of burning. But as he was making preparations for a funeral pile,
he remembered that he had not brought fire with him. If he went
for fire leaving the elder thief behind, he would undoubtedly run
away. What then was to be done? At last he tied the straw rope to the
branch of a tree, and kept the pretended corpse hanging in the air,
and he himself climbed into the tree and sat on that branch, keeping
tight hold of the rope lest it should break, and the elder thief run
away. While they were in this state, a gang of robbers passed by. On
seeing the corpse hanging, the head of the gang said, "This raid of
ours has begun very auspiciously. Brahmans and Pandits say that if
on starting on a journey one sees a corpse, it is a good omen. Well,
we have seen a corpse, it is therefore likely that we shall meet with
success this night. If we do, I propose one thing: on our return let
us first burn this dead body and then return home." All the robbers
agreed to this proposal. The robbers then entered into the house of
a rich man in the village, put its inmates to the sword, robbed it of
all its treasures, and withal managed it so cleverly that not a mouse
stirred in the village. As they were successful beyond measure, they
resolved on their return to burn the dead body they had seen. When they
came to the place of burning they found the corpse hanging as before,
for the elder thief had not yet opened his mouth lest he should be
obliged to give half of the gold mohur. The thieves dug a hollow
in the ground, brought fuel, and laid it upon the hollow. They took
down the corpse from the tree, and laid it upon the pile; and as they
were going to set it on fire, the corpse gave out an unearthly scream
and jumped up. That very moment the younger thief jumped down from
the tree with a similar scream. The robbers were frightened beyond
measure. They thought that a Dana (evil spirit) had possessed the
corpse, and that a ghost jumped down from the tree. They ran away in
great fear, leaving behind them the money and the jewels which they had
obtained by robbery. The two thieves laughed heartily, took up all the
riches of the robbers, went home, and lived merrily for a long time.




PART II

The elder thief and the younger thief had one son each. As they had
been so far successful in life by practising the art of thieving, they
resolved to train up their sons to the same profession. There was in
the village a Professor of the Science of Roguery, who took pupils,
and gave them lessons in that difficult science. The two thieves
put their sons under this renowned Professor. The son of the elder
thief distinguished himself very much, and bade fair to surpass his
father in the art of stealing. The lad's cleverness was tested in the
following manner. Not far from the Professor's house there lived a
poor man in a hut, upon the thatch of which climbed a creeper of the
gourd kind. In the middle of the thatch, which was also its topmost
part, there was a splendid gourd, which the man and his wife watched
day and night. They certainly slept at night, but then the thatch was
so old and rickety that if even a mouse went up to it bits of straw
and particles of earth used to fall inside the hut, and the man and
his wife slept right below the spot where the gourd was; so that it
was next to impossible to steal the gourd without the knowledge of
its owners. The Professor said to his pupils--for he had many--that
any one who stole the gourd without being caught would be pronounced
the dux of the school. Our elder thief's son at once accepted the
offer. He said he would steal away the gourd if he were allowed the use
of three things, namely, a string, a cat, and a knife. The Professor
allowed him the use of these three things. Two or three hours after
nightfall, the lad, furnished with the three things mentioned above,
sat behind the thatch under the eaves, listening to the conversation
carried on by the man and his wife lying in bed inside the hut. In
a short time the conversation ceased. The lad then concluded that
they must both have fallen asleep. He waited half an hour longer,
and hearing no sound inside, gently climbed up on the thatch. Chips of
straw and particles of earth fell upon the couple sleeping inside. The
woman woke up, and rousing her husband said, "Look there, some one is
stealing the gourd!" That moment the lad squeezed the throat of the
cat, and puss immediately gave out her usual "Mew! mew! mew!" The
husband said, "Don't you hear the cat mewing? There is no thief;
it is only a cat." The lad in the meantime cut the gourd from the
plant with his knife, and tied the string which he had with him to
its stalk. But how was he to get down without being discovered and
caught, especially as the man and the woman were now awake? The woman
was not convinced that it was only a cat; the shaking of the thatch,
and the constant falling of bits of straw and particles of dust, made
her think that it was a human being that was upon the thatch. She was
telling her husband to go out and see whether a man was not there;
but he maintained that it was only a cat. While the man and woman
were thus disputing with each other, the lad with great force threw
down the cat upon the ground, on which the poor animal purred most
vociferously; and the man said aloud to his wife, "There it is; you
are now convinced that it was only a cat." In the meantime, during
the confusion created by the clamour of the cat and the loud talk
of the man, the lad quietly came down from the thatch with the gourd
tied to the string. Next morning the lad produced the gourd before his
teacher, and described to him and to his admiring comrades the manner
in which he had committed the theft. The Professor was in ecstasy,
and remarked, "The worthy son of a worthy father." But the elder
thief, the father of our hopeful genius, was by no means satisfied
that his son was as yet fit to enter the world. He wanted to prove
him still further. Addressing his son he said, "My son, if you can
do what I tell you, I'll think you fit to enter the world. If you
can steal the gold chain of the queen of this country from her neck,
and bring it to me, I'll think you fit to enter the world." The gifted
son readily agreed to do the daring deed.

The young thief--for so we shall now call the son of the elder
thief--made a reconnaissance of the palace in which the king and queen
lived. He reconnoitred all the four gates, and all the outer and inner
walls as far as he could; and gathered incidentally a good deal of
information, from people living in the neighbourhood, regarding the
habits of the king and queen, in what part of the palace they slept,
what guards there were near the bedchamber, and who, if any, slept
in the antechamber. Armed with all this knowledge the young thief
fixed upon one dark night for doing the daring deed. He took with
him a sword, a hammer and some large nails, and put on very dark
clothes. Thus accoutred he went prowling about the Lion gate of the
palace. Before the zenana [28] could be got at, four doors, including
the Lion gate, had to be passed; and each of these doors had a guard
of sixteen stalwart men. The same men, however, did not remain all
night at their post. As the king had an infinite number of soldiers
at his command, the guards at the doors were relieved every hour; so
that once every hour at each door there were thirty-two men present,
consisting of the relieving party and of the relieved. The young thief
chose that particular moment of time for entering each of the four
doors. At the time of relief when he saw the Lion gate crowded with
thirty-two men, he joined the crowd without being taken notice of; he
then spent the hour preceding the next relief in the large open space
and garden between two doors; and he could not be taken notice of, as
the night as well as his clothes was pitch dark. In a similar manner
he passed the second door, the third door, and the fourth door. And
now the queen's bedchamber stared him in the face. It was in the third
loft; there was a bright light in it; and a low voice was heard as
that of a woman saying something in a humdrum manner. The young thief
thought that the voice must be the voice of a maid-servant reciting
a story, as he had learnt was the custom in the palace every night,
for composing the king and queen to sleep. But how to get up into the
third loft? The inner doors were all closed, and there were guards
everywhere. But the young thief had with him nails and a hammer: why
not drive the nails into the wall and climb up by them? True; but the
driving of nails into the wall would make a great noise which would
rouse the guards, and possibly the king and queen,--at any rate the
maid-servant reciting stories would give the alarm. Our erratic genius
had considered that matter well before engaging in the work. There is
a water-clock in the palace which shows the hours; and at the end of
every hour a very large Chinese gong is struck, the sound of which
is so loud that it is not only heard all over the palace, but over
most part of the city; and the peculiarity of the gong, as of every
Chinese gong, was that nearly one minute must elapse after the first
stroke before the second stroke could be made, to allow the gong to
give out the whole of its sound. The thief fixed upon the minutes
when the gong was struck at the end of every hour for driving nails
into the wall. At ten o'clock when the gong was struck ten times, the
thief found it easy to drive ten nails into the wall. When the gong
stopped, the thief also stopped, and either sat or stood quiet on the
ninth nail catching hold of the tenth which was above the other. At
eleven o'clock he drove into the wall in a similar manner eleven nails,
and got a little higher than the second story; and by twelve o'clock
he was in the loft where the royal bedchamber was. Peeping in he saw
a drowsy maid-servant drowsily reciting a story, and the king and
queen apparently asleep. He went stealthily behind the story-telling
maid-servant and took his seat. The queen was lying down on a richly
furnished bedstead of gold beside the king. The massive chain of gold
round the neck of the queen was gleaming in candle-light. The thief
quietly listened to the story of the drowsy maid-servant. She was
becoming more and more sleepy. She stopped for a second, nodded her
head, and again resumed the story. It was plain she was under the
influence of sleep. In a moment the thief cut off the head of the
maid-servant with his sword, and himself went on reciting for some
minutes the story which the woman was telling. The king and queen were
unconscious of any change as to the person of the story-teller, for
they were both in deep sleep. He stripped the murdered woman of her
clothes, put them on himself, tied up his own clothes in a bundle,
and walking softly, gently took off the chain from the neck of the
queen. He then went through the rooms down stairs, ordered the inner
guard to open the door, as she was obliged to go out of the palace
for purposes of necessity. The guards, seeing that it was the queen's
maid-servant, readily allowed her to go out. In the same manner, and
with the same pretext, he got through the other doors, and at last
out into the street. That very night, or rather morning, the young
thief put into his father's hand the gold chain of the queen. The
elder thief could scarcely believe his own eyes. It was so like a
dream. His joy knew no bounds. Addressing his son he said--"Well done,
my son; you are not only as clever as your father, but you have beaten
me hollow. The gods give you long life, my son."

Next morning when the king and queen got up from bed, they were
shocked to see the maid-servant lying in a pool of blood. The queen
also found that her gold chain was not round her neck. They could not
make out how all this could have taken place. How could any thief
manage to elude the vigilance of so many guards? How could he get
into the queen's bedchamber? And how could he again escape? The king
found from the reports of the guards that a person calling herself
the royal maid-servant had gone out of the palace some hours before
dawn. All sorts of inquiries were made, but in vain. Proclamation
was made in the city; a large reward was offered to any one who
would give information tending to the apprehension of the thief and
murderer. But no one responded to the call. At last the king ordered
a camel to be brought to him. On the back of the animal was placed
two large bags filled with gold mohurs. The man taking charge of the
bags upon the camel was ordered to go through every part of the city
making the following challenge:--"As the thief was daring enough to
steal away a gold chain from the neck of the queen, let him further
show his daring by stealing the gold mohurs from the back of this
camel." Two days and nights the camel paraded through the city, but
nothing happened. On the third night as the camel-driver was going
his rounds he was accosted by a sannyasi, [29] who sat on a tiger's
skin before a fire, and near whom was a monstrous pair of tongs. This
sannyasi was no other than the young thief in disguise. The sannyasi
said to the camel-driver--"Brother, why are you going through the city
in this manner? Who is there so daring as to steal from the back of the
king's camel? Come down, friend, and smoke with me." The camel-driver
alighted, tied the camel to a tree on the spot, and began smoking. The
mendicant supplied him not only with tobacco, but with ganja and other
intoxicating drugs, so that in a short time the camel-driver became
quite intoxicated and fell asleep. The young thief led away the camel
with the treasure on its back in the dead of night, through narrow
lanes and bye-paths to his own house. That very night the camel was
killed, and its carcase buried in deep pits in the earth, and the
thing was so managed that no one could discover any trace of it.

The next morning when the king heard that the camel-driver was
lying drunk in the street, and that the camel had been made away
with together with the treasure, he was almost beside himself with
anger. Proclamation was made in the city to the effect that whoever
caught the thief would get the reward of a lakh of rupees. The son of
the younger thief--who, by the way, was in the same school of roguery
with the son of the elder thief, though he did not distinguish himself
so much--now came to the front and said that he would apprehend the
thief. He of course suspected that the son of the elder thief must
have done it--for who so daring and clever as he? In the evening of
the following day the son of the younger thief disguised himself as a
woman, and coming to that part of the town where the young thief lived,
began to weep very much, and went from door to door saying--"O sirs,
can any of you give me a bit of camel's flesh, for my son is dying,
and the doctors say nothing but eating camel's meat can save his
life. O for pity's sake, do give me a bit of camel's flesh." At last
he went to the house of the young thief, and begged of the wife--for
the young thief himself was out--to tell him where he could get hold
of camel's flesh, as his son would assuredly perish if it could not
be got. Saying this he rent the air with his cries, and fell down at
the feet of the young thief's wife. Woman as she was, though the wife
of a thief, she felt pity for the supposed woman, and said--"Wait,
and I will try and get some camel's flesh for your son." So saying,
she secretly went to the spot where the dead camel had been buried,
brought a small quantity of flesh, and gave it to the party. The son
of the younger thief was now entranced with joy. He went and told the
king that he had succeeded in tracing the thief, and would be ready to
deliver him up at night if the king would send some constables with
him. At night the elder thief and his son were captured, the body
of the camel dug out, and all the treasures in the house seized. The
following morning the king sat in judgment. The son of the elder thief
confessed that he had stolen the queen's gold chain, and killed the
maid-servant, and had taken away the camel; but he added that the
person who had detected him and his father--the younger thief--were
also thieves and murderers, of which fact he gave undoubted proofs. As
the king had promised to give a lakh of rupees to the detective, that
sum was placed before the son of the younger thief. But soon after he
ordered four pits to be dug in the earth in which were buried alive,
with all sorts of thorns and thistles, the elder thief and the younger
thief, and their two sons.


            Here my story endeth,
            The Natiya-thorn withereth, etc.







XII

THE GHOST-BRAHMAN


Once on a time there lived a poor Brahman, who not being a Kulin,
found it the hardest thing in the world to get married. He went to
rich people and begged of them to give him money that he might marry a
wife. And a large sum of money was needed, not so much for the expenses
of the wedding, as for giving to the parents of the bride. He begged
from door to door, flattered many rich folk, and at last succeeded in
scraping together the sum needed. The wedding took place in due time;
and he brought home his wife to his mother. After a short time he said
to his mother--"Mother, I have no means to support you and my wife; I
must therefore go to distant countries to get money somehow or other. I
may be away for years, for I won't return till I get a good sum. In
the meantime I'll give you what I have; you make the best of it, and
take care of my wife." The Brahman receiving his mother's blessing set
out on his travels. In the evening of that very day, a ghost assuming
the exact appearance of the Brahman came into the house. The newly
married woman, thinking it was her husband, said to him--"How is it
that you have returned so soon? You said you might be away for years;
why have you changed your mind?" The ghost said--"To-day is not a
lucky day, I have therefore returned home; besides, I have already
got some money." The mother did not doubt but that it was her son. So
the ghost lived in the house as if he was its owner, and as if he was
the son of the old woman and the husband of the young woman. As the
ghost and the Brahman were exactly like each other in everything, like
two peas, the people in the neighbourhood all thought that the ghost
was the real Brahman. After some years the Brahman returned from his
travels; and what was his surprise when he found another like him in
the house. The ghost said to the Brahman--"Who are you? what business
have you to come to my house?" "Who am I?" replied the Brahman, "let
me ask who you are. This is my house; that is my mother, and this
is my wife." The ghost said--"Why herein is a strange thing. Every
one knows that this is my house, that is my wife, and yonder is
my mother; and I have lived here for years. And you pretend this
is your house, and that woman is your wife. Your head must have got
turned, Brahman." So saying the ghost drove away the Brahman from his
house. The Brahman became mute with wonder. He did not know what to
do. At last he bethought himself of going to the king and of laying
his case before him. The king saw the ghost-Brahman as well as the
Brahman, and the one was the picture of the other; so he was in a
fix, and did not know how to decide the quarrel. Day after day the
Brahman went to the king and besought him to give him back his house,
his wife, and his mother; and the king, not knowing what to say every
time, put him off to the following day. Every day the king tells him
to--"Come to-morrow"; and every day the Brahman goes away from the
palace weeping and striking his forehead with the palm of his hand,
and saying--"What a wicked world this is! I am driven from my own
house, and another fellow has taken possession of my house and of my
wife! And what a king this is! He does not do justice."

Now, it came to pass that as the Brahman went away every day from
the court outside the town, he passed a spot at which a great
many cowboys used to play. They let the cows graze on the meadow,
while they themselves met together under a large tree to play. And
they played at royalty. One cowboy was elected king; another, prime
minister or vizier; another, kotwal, or prefect of the police; and
others, constables. Every day for several days together they saw
the Brahman passing by weeping. One day the cowboy king asked his
vizier whether he knew why the Brahman wept every day. On the vizier
not being able to answer the question, the cowboy king ordered one of
his constables to bring the Brahman to him. One of them went and said
to the Brahman--"The king requires your immediate attendance." The
Brahman replied--"What for? I have just come from the king, and he
put me off till to-morrow. Why does he want me again?" "It is our king
that wants you--our neat-herd king," rejoined the constable. "Who is
neat-herd king?" asked the Brahman. "Come and see," was the reply. The
neat-herd king then asked the Brahman why he every day went away
weeping. The Brahman then told him his sad story. The neat-herd king,
after hearing the whole, said, "I understand your case; I will give
you again all your rights. Only go to the king and ask his permission
for me to decide your case." The Brahman went back to the king of the
country, and begged his Majesty to send his case to the neat-herd king,
who had offered to decide it. The king, whom the case had greatly
puzzled, granted the permission sought. The following morning was
fixed for the trial. The neat-herd king, who saw through the whole,
brought with him next day a phial with a narrow neck. The Brahman
and the ghost-Brahman both appeared at the bar. After a great deal
of examination of witnesses and of speech-making, the neat-herd king
said--"Well, I have heard enough. I'll decide the case at once. Here
is this phial. Whichever of you will enter into it shall be declared
by the court to be the rightful owner of the house the title of
which is in dispute. Now, let me see, which of you will enter." The
Brahman said--"You are a neat-herd, and your intellect is that of
a neat-herd. What man can enter into such a small phial?" "If you
cannot enter," said the neat-herd king, "then you are not the rightful
owner. What do you say, sir, to this?" turning to the ghost-Brahman
and addressing him. "If you can enter into the phial, then the
house and the wife and the mother become yours." "Of course I will
enter," said the ghost. And true to his word, to the wonder of all,
he made himself into a small creature like an insect, and entered
into the phial. The neat-herd king forthwith corked up the phial,
and the ghost could not get out. Then, addressing the Brahman, the
neat-herd king said, "Throw this phial into the bottom of the sea,
and take possession of your house, wife, and mother." The Brahman
did so, and lived happily for many years and begat sons and daughters.


            Here my story endeth,
            The Natiya-thorn withereth, etc.







XIII

THE MAN WHO WISHED TO BE PERFECT


Once on a time a religious mendicant came to a king who had no issue,
and said to him, "As you are anxious to have a son, I can give to the
queen a drug, by swallowing which she will give birth to twin sons;
but I will give the medicine on this condition, that of those twins you
will give one to me, and keep the other yourself." The king thought
the condition somewhat hard, but as he was anxious to have a son to
bear his name, and inherit his wealth and kingdom, he at last agreed
to the terms. Accordingly the queen swallowed the drug, and in due
time gave birth to two sons. The twin brothers became one year old,
two years old, three years old, four years old, five years old, and
still the mendicant did not appear to claim his share; the king and
queen therefore thought that the mendicant, who was old, was dead, and
dismissed all fears from their minds. But the mendicant was not dead,
but living; he was counting the years carefully. The young princes
were put under tutors, and made rapid progress in learning, as well
as in the arts of riding and shooting with the bow; and as they were
uncommonly handsome, they were admired by all the people. When the
princes were sixteen years old the mendicant made his appearance at the
palace gate, and demanded the fulfilment of the king's promise. The
hearts of the king and of the queen were dried up within them. They
had thought that the mendicant was no more in the land of the living;
but what was their surprise when they saw him standing at the gate
in flesh and blood, and demanding one of the young princes for
himself? The king and queen were plunged into a sea of grief. There
was nothing for it, however, but to part with one of the princes;
for the mendicant might by his curse turn into ashes not only both
the princes, but also the king, queen, palace, and the whole of the
kingdom to boot. But which one was to be given away? The one was as
dear as the other. A fearful struggle arose in the hearts of the king
and queen. As for the young princes, each of them said, "I'll go,"
"I'll go." The younger one said to the elder, "You are older, if
only by a few minutes; you are the pride of my father; you remain
at home, I'll go with the mendicant." The elder said to the younger,
"You are younger than I am; you are the joy of my mother; you remain
at home, I'll go with the mendicant." After a great deal of yea and
nay, after a great deal of mourning and lamentation, after the queen
had wetted her clothes with her tears, the elder prince was let go
with the mendicant. But before the prince left his father's roof he
planted with his own hands a tree in the courtyard of the palace, and
said to his parents and brother, "This tree is my life. When you see
the tree green and fresh, then know that it is well with me; when you
see the tree fade in some parts, then know that I am in an ill case;
and when you see the whole tree fade, then know that I am dead and
gone." Then kissing and embracing the king and queen and his brother,
he followed the mendicant.

As the mendicant and the prince were wending their way towards the
forest they saw some dog's whelps on the roadside. One of the whelps
said to its dam, "Mother, I wish to go with that handsome young man,
who must be a prince." The dam said, "Go"; and the prince gladly
took the puppy as his companion. They had not gone far when upon
a tree on the roadside they saw a hawk and its young ones. One of
the young ones said to its dam, "Mother, I wish to go with that
handsome young man, who must be the son of a king." The hawk said,
"Go"; and the prince gladly took the young hawk as his companion. So
the mendicant, the prince, with the puppy and the young hawk, went
on their journey. At last they went into the depth of the forest far
away from the houses of men, where they stopped before a hut thatched
with leaves. That was the mendicant's cell. The mendicant said to
the prince, "You are to live in this hut with me. Your chief work
will be to cull flowers from the forest for my devotions. You can
go on every side except the north. If you go towards the north evil
will betide you. You can eat whatever fruit or root you like; and
for your drink, you will get it from the brook." The prince disliked
neither the place nor his work. At dawn he used to cull flowers in
the forest and give them to the mendicant; after which the mendicant
went away somewhere the whole day and did not return till sundown;
so the prince had the whole day to himself. He used to walk about in
the forest with his two companions--the puppy and the young hawk. He
used to shoot arrows at the deer, of which there was a great number;
and thus made the best of his time. One day as he pierced a stag with
an arrow, the wounded stag ran towards the north, and the prince, not
thinking of the mendicant's behest, followed the stag, which entered
into a fine-looking house that stood close by. The prince entered,
but instead of finding the deer he saw a young woman of matchless
beauty sitting near the door with a dice-table set before her. The
prince was rooted to the spot while he admired the heaven-born
beauty of the lady. "Come in, stranger," said the lady; "chance has
brought you here, but don't go away without having with me a game of
dice." The prince gladly agreed to the proposal. As it was a game of
risk they agreed that if the prince lost the game he should give his
young hawk to the lady; and that if the lady lost it, she should give
to the prince a young hawk just like that of the prince. The lady won
the game; she therefore took the prince's young hawk and kept it in a
hole covered with a plank. The prince offered to play a second time,
and the lady agreeing to it, they fell to it again, on the condition
that if the lady won the game she should take the prince's puppy,
and if she lost it she should give to the prince a puppy just like
that of the prince. The lady won again, and stowed away the puppy in
another hole with a plank upon it. The prince offered to play a third
time, and the wager was that, if the prince lost the game, he should
give himself up to the lady to be done to by her anything she pleased;
and that if he won, the lady should give him a young man exactly like
himself. The lady won the game a third time; she therefore caught hold
of the prince and put him in a hole covered over with a plank. Now,
the beautiful lady was not a woman at all; she was a Rakshasi who
lived upon human flesh, and her mouth watered at the sight of the
tender body of the young prince. But as she had had her food that
day she reserved the prince for the meal of the following day.

Meantime there was great weeping in the house of the prince's
father. His brother used every day to look at the tree planted in
the courtyard by his own hand. Hitherto he had found the leaves of
a living green colour; but suddenly he found some leaves fading. He
gave the alarm to the king and queen, and told them how the leaves
were fading. They concluded that the life of the elder prince must
be in great danger. The younger prince therefore resolved to go to
the help of his brother, but before going he planted a tree in the
courtyard of the palace, similar to the one his brother had planted,
and which was to be the index of the manner of his life. He chose
the swiftest steed in the king's stables, and galloped towards the
forest. In the way he saw a dog with a puppy, and the puppy thinking
that the rider was the same that had taken away his fellow-cub--for
the two princes were exactly like each other--said, "As you have
taken away my brother, take me also with you." The younger prince
understanding that his brother had taken away a puppy, he took up
that cub as a companion. Further on, a young hawk, which was perched
on a tree on the roadside, said to the prince, "You have taken away
my brother; take me also, I beseech you"; on which the younger prince
readily took it up. With these companions he went into the heart of the
forest, where he saw a hut which he supposed to be the mendicant's. But
neither the mendicant nor his brother was there. Not knowing what to
do or where to go, he dismounted from his horse, allowed it to graze,
while he himself sat inside the house. At sunset the mendicant returned
to his hut, and seeing the younger prince, said, "I am glad to see
you. I told your brother never to go towards the north, for evil in
that case would betide him; but it seems that, disobeying my orders,
he has gone to the north and has fallen into the toils of a Rakshasi
who lives there. There is no hope of rescuing him; perhaps he has
already been devoured." The younger prince forthwith went towards
the north, where he saw a stag which he pierced with an arrow. The
stag ran into a house which stood by, and the younger prince followed
it. He was not a little astonished when, instead of seeing a stag,
he saw a woman of exquisite beauty. He immediately concluded, from
what he had heard from the mendicant, that the pretended woman was none
other than the Rakshasi in whose power his brother was. The lady asked
him to play a game of dice with her. He complied with the request,
and on the same conditions on which the elder prince had played. The
younger prince won; on which the lady produced the young hawk from the
hole and gave it to the prince. The joy of the two hawks on meeting
each other was great. The lady and the prince played a second time,
and the prince won again. The lady therefore brought to the prince
the young puppy lying in the hole. They played a third time, and the
prince won a third time. The lady demurred to producing a young man
exactly like the prince, pretending that it was impossible to get one;
but on the prince insisting upon the fulfilment of the condition,
his brother was produced. The joy of the two brothers on meeting each
other was great. The Rakshasi said to the princes, "Don't kill me,
and I will tell you a secret which will save the life of the elder
prince." She then told them that the mendicant was a worshipper of the
goddess Kali, who had a temple not far off; that he belonged to that
sect of Hindus who seek perfection from intercourse with the spirits of
departed men; that he had already sacrificed at the altar of Kali six
human victims whose skulls could be seen in niches inside her temple;
that he would become perfect when the seventh victim was sacrificed;
and that the elder prince was intended for the seventh victim. The
Rakshasi then told the prince to go immediately to the temple to find
out the truth of what she had said. To the temple they accordingly
went. When the elder prince went inside the temple, the skulls in the
niches laughed a ghastly laugh. Horror-struck at the sight and sound,
he inquired the cause of the laughter; and the skulls told him that
they were glad because they were about to get another added to their
number. One of the skulls, as spokesman of the rest, said, "Young
prince, in a few days the mendicant's devotions will be completed, and
you will be brought into this temple and your head will be cut off, and
you will keep company with us. But there is one way by which you can
escape that fate and do us good." "Oh, do tell me," said the prince,
"what that way is, and I promise to do you all the good I can." The
skull replied, "When the mendicant brings you into this temple to offer
you up as a sacrifice, before cutting off your head he will tell you
to prostrate yourself before Mother Kali, and while you prostrate
yourself he will cut off your head. But take our advice, when he
tells you to bow down before Kali, you tell him that as a prince you
never bowed down to any one, that you never knew what bowing down was,
and that the mendicant should show it to you by himself doing it in
your presence. And when he bows down to show you how it is done, you
take up your sword and separate his head from his body. And when you
do that we shall all be restored to life, as the mendicant's vows will
be unfulfilled." The elder prince thanked the skulls for their advice,
and went into the hut of the mendicant along with his younger brother.

In the course of a few days the mendicant's devotions were
completed. On the following day he told the prince to go along with
him to the temple of Kali, for what reason he did not mention; but the
prince knew it was to offer him up as a victim to the goddess. The
younger prince also went with them, but he was not allowed to go
inside the temple. The mendicant then stood in the presence of Kali
and said to the prince, "Bow down to the goddess." The prince replied,
"I have not, as a prince, bowed to any one; I do not know how to
perform the act of prostration. Please show me the way first, and
I'll gladly do it." The mendicant then prostrated himself before the
goddess; and while he was doing so the prince at one stroke of his
sword separated his head from his body. Immediately the skulls in the
niches of the temple laughed aloud, and the goddess herself became
propitious to the prince and gave him that virtue of perfection which
the mendicant had sought to obtain. The skulls were again united to
their respective bodies and became living men, and the two princes
returned to their country.


            Here my story endeth,
            The Natiya-thorn withereth, etc.







XIV

A GHOSTLY WIFE


Once on a time there lived a Brahman who had married a wife, and who
lived in the same house with his mother. Near his house was a tank,
on the embankment of which stood a tree, on the boughs of which lived
a ghost of the kind called Sankchinni. [30] One night the Brahman's
wife had occasion to go to the tank, and as she went she brushed by a
Sankchinni who stood near; on which the she-ghost got very angry with
the woman, seized her by the throat, climbed into her tree, and thrust
her into a hole in the trunk. There the woman lay almost dead with
fear. The ghost put on the clothes of the woman and went into the house
of the Brahman. Neither the Brahman nor his mother had any inkling
of the change. The Brahman thought his wife returned from the tank,
and the mother thought that it was her daughter-in-law. Next morning
the mother-in-law discovered some change in her daughter-in-law. Her
daughter-in-law, she knew, was constitutionally weak and languid, and
took a long time to do the work of the house. But she had apparently
become quite a different person. All of a sudden she had become very
active. She now did the work of the house in an incredibly short
time. Suspecting nothing, the old woman said nothing either to her
son or to her daughter-in-law; on the contrary, she inly rejoiced
that her daughter-in-law had turned over a new leaf. But her surprise
became every day greater and greater. The cooking of the household
was done in much less time than before. When the mother-in-law
wanted the daughter-in-law to bring anything from the next room, it
was brought in much less time than was required in walking from one
room to the other. The ghost, instead of going inside the next room,
would stretch a long arm--for ghosts can lengthen or shorten any
limb of their bodies--from the door and get the thing. One day the
old woman observed the ghost doing this. She ordered her to bring a
vessel from some distance, and the ghost unconsciously stretched her
hand to several yards' distance, and brought it in a trice. The old
woman was struck with wonder at the sight. She said nothing to her,
but spoke to her son. Both mother and son began to watch the ghost
more narrowly. One day the old woman knew that there was no fire in
the house, and she knew also that her daughter-in-law had not gone
out of doors to get it; and yet, strange to say, the hearth in the
kitchen-room was quite in a blaze. She went in, and, to her infinite
surprise, found that her daughter-in-law was not using any fuel for
cooking, but had thrust into the oven her foot, which was blazing
brightly. The old mother told her son what she had seen, and they both
concluded that the young woman in the house was not his real wife but
a she-ghost. The son witnessed those very acts of the ghost which his
mother had seen. An Ojha [31] was therefore sent for. The exorcist
came, and wanted in the first instance to ascertain whether the woman
was a real woman or a ghost. For this purpose he lighted a piece of
turmeric and set it below the nose of the supposed woman. Now this
was an infallible test, as no ghost, whether male or female, can put
up with the smell of burnt turmeric. The moment the lighted turmeric
was taken near her, she screamed aloud and ran away from the room. It
was now plain that she was either a ghost or a woman possessed by a
ghost. The woman was caught hold of by main force and asked who she
was. At first she refused to make any disclosures, on which the Ojha
took up his slippers and began belabouring her with them. Then the
ghost said with a strong nasal accent--for all ghosts speak through
the nose--that she was a Sankchinni, that she lived on a tree by the
side of the tank, that she had seized the young Brahmani and put her
in the hollow of her tree because one night she had touched her, and
that if any person went to the hole the woman would be found. The
woman was brought from the tree almost dead; the ghost was again
shoebeaten, after which process, on her declaring solemnly that she
would not again do any harm to the Brahman and his family, she was
released from the spell of the Ojha and sent away; and the wife of
the Brahman recovered slowly. After which the Brahman and his wife
lived many years happily together and begat many sons and daughters.


            Here my story endeth,
            The Natiya-thorn withereth, etc.







XV

THE STORY OF A BRAHMADAITYA [32]


Once on a time there lived a poor Brahman who had a wife. As he had
no means of livelihood, he used every day to beg from door to door,
and thus got some rice which they boiled and ate, together with some
greens which they gleaned from the fields. After some time it chanced
that the village changed its owner, and the Brahman bethought himself
of asking some boon of the new laird. So one morning the Brahman
went to the laird's house to pay him court. It so happened that at
that time the laird was making inquiries of his servants about the
village and its various parts. The laird was told that a certain
banyan-tree in the outskirts of the village was haunted by a number
of ghosts; and that no man had ever the boldness to go to that tree
at night. In bygone days some rash fellows went to the tree at night,
but the necks of them all were wrung, and they all died. Since that
time no man had ventured to go to the tree at night, though in the
day some neat-herds took their cows to the spot. The new laird on
hearing this said, that if any one would go at night to the tree, cut
one of its branches and bring it to him, he would make him a present
of a hundred bighas [33] of rent-free land. None of the servants of
the laird accepted the challenge, as they were sure they would be
throttled by the ghosts. The Brahman, who was sitting there, thought
within himself thus--"I am almost starved to death now, as I never get
my bellyful. If I go to the tree at night and succeed in cutting off
one of its branches I shall get one hundred bighas of rent-free land,
and become independent for life. If the ghosts kill me, my case will
not be worse, for to die of hunger is no better than to be killed by
ghosts." He then offered to go to the tree and cut off a branch that
night. The laird renewed his promise, and said to the Brahman that if
he succeeded in bringing one of the branches of that haunted tree at
night he would certainly give him one hundred bighas of rent-free land.

In the course of the day when the people of the village heard of the
laird's promise and of the Brahman's offer, they all pitied the poor
man. They blamed him for his foolhardiness, as they were sure the
ghosts would kill him, as they had killed so many before. His wife
tried to dissuade him from the rash undertaking; but in vain. He said
he would die in any case; but there was some chance of his escaping,
and of thus becoming independent for life. Accordingly, one hour after
sundown, the Brahman set out. He went to the outskirts of the village
without the slightest fear as far as a certain vakula-tree (Mimusops
Elengi), from which the haunted tree was about one rope distant. But
under the vakula-tree the Brahman's heart misgave him. He began to
quake with fear, and the heaving of his heart was like the upward and
downward motion of the paddy-husking pedal. The vakula-tree was the
haunt of a Brahmadaitya, who, seeing the Brahman stop under the tree,
spoke to him, and said, "Are you afraid, Brahman? Tell me what you wish
to do, and I'll help you. I am a Brahmadaitya." The Brahman replied,
"O blessed spirit, I wish to go to yonder banyan-tree, and cut off
one of its branches for the zemindar, who has promised to give me one
hundred bighas of rent-free land for it. But my courage is failing
me. I shall thank you very much for helping me." The Brahmadaitya
answered, "Certainly I'll help you, Brahman. Go on towards the tree,
and I'll come with you." The Brahman, relying on the supernatural
strength of his invisible patron, who is the object of the fear and
reverence of common ghosts, fearlessly walked towards the haunted tree,
on reaching which he began to cut a branch with the bill which was
in his hand. But the moment the first stroke was given, a great many
ghosts rushed towards the Brahman, who would have been torn to pieces
but for the interference of the Brahmadaitya. The Brahmadaitya said in
a commanding tone, "Ghosts, listen. This is a poor Brahman. He wishes
to get a branch of this tree which will be of great use to him. It is
my will that you let him cut a branch." The ghosts, hearing the voice
of the Brahmadaitya, replied, "Be it according to thy will, lord. At
thy bidding we are ready to do anything. Let not the Brahman take
the trouble of cutting; we ourselves will cut a branch for him." So
saying, in the twinkling of an eye, the ghosts put into the hands of
the Brahman a branch of the tree, with which he went as fast as his
legs could carry him to the house of the zemindar. The zemindar and
his people were not a little surprised to see the branch; but he said,
"Well, I must see to-morrow whether this branch is a branch of the
haunted tree or not; if it be, you will get the promised reward."

Next morning the zemindar himself went along with his servants to the
haunted tree, and found to their infinite surprise that the branch in
their hands was really a branch of that tree, as they saw the part
from which it had been cut off. Being thus satisfied, the zemindar
ordered a deed to be drawn up, by which he gave to the Brahman for
ever one hundred bighas of rent-free land. Thus in one night the
Brahman became a rich man.

It so happened that the fields, of which the Brahman became the owner,
were covered with ripe paddy, ready for the sickle. But the Brahman
had not the means to reap the golden harvest. He had not a pice in
his pocket for paying the wages of the reapers. What was the Brahman
to do? He went to his spirit-friend the Brahmadaitya, and said,
"Oh, Brahmadaitya, I am in great distress. Through your kindness I
got the rent-free land all covered with ripe paddy. But I have not
the means of cutting the paddy, as I am a poor man. What shall I
do?" The kind Brahmadaitya answered, "Oh, Brahman, don't be troubled
in your mind about the matter. I'll see to it that the paddy is not
only cut, but that the corn is threshed and stored up in granaries,
and the straw piled up in ricks. Only you do one thing. Borrow from
men in the village one hundred sickles, and put them all at the foot
of this tree at night. Prepare also the exact spot on which the grain
and the straw are to be stored up."

The joy of the Brahman knew no bounds. He easily got a hundred sickles,
as the husbandmen of the village, knowing that he had become rich,
readily lent him what he wanted. At sunset he took the hundred sickles
and put them beneath the vakula-tree. He also selected a spot of ground
near his hut for his magazine of paddy and for his ricks of straw;
and washed the spot with a solution of cow-dung and water. After
making these preparations he went to sleep.

In the meantime, soon after nightfall, when the villagers had all
retired to their houses, the Brahmadaitya called to him the ghosts
of the haunted tree, who were one hundred in number, and said to
them, "You must to-night do some work for the poor Brahman whom I
am befriending. The hundred bighas of land which he has got from the
zemindar are all covered with standing ripe corn. He has not the means
to reap it. This night you all must do the work for him. Here are,
you see, a hundred sickles; let each of you take a sickle in hand and
come to the field I shall show him. There are a hundred of you. Let
each ghost cut the paddy of one bigha, bring the sheaves on his back
to the Brahman's house, thresh the corn, put the corn in one large
granary, and pile up the straw in separate ricks. Now, don't lose
time. You must do it all this very night." The hundred ghosts at once
said to the Brahmadaitya, "We are ready to do whatever your lordship
commands us." The Brahmadaitya showed the ghosts the Brahman's house,
and the spot prepared for receiving the grain and the straw, and
then took them to the Brahman's fields, all waving with the golden
harvest. The ghosts at once fell to it. A ghost harvest-reaper is
different from a human harvest-reaper. What a man cuts in a whole day,
a ghost cuts in a minute. Mash, mash, mash, the sickles went round,
and the long stalks of paddy fell to the ground. The reaping over,
the ghosts took up the sheaves on their huge backs and carried them
all to the Brahman's house. The ghosts then separated the grain from
the straw, stored up the grain in one huge store-house, and piled
up the straw in many a fantastic rick. It was full two hours before
sunrise when the ghosts finished their work and retired to rest on
their tree. No words can tell either the joy of the Brahman and his
wife when early next morning they opened the door of their hut, or
the surprise of the villagers, when they saw the huge granary and the
fantastic ricks of straw. The villagers did not understand it. They
at once ascribed it to the gods.

A few days after this the Brahman went to the vakula-tree and
said to the Brahmadaitya, "I have one more favour to ask of you,
Brahmadaitya. As the gods have been very gracious to me, I wish to feed
one thousand Brahmans; and I shall thank you for providing me with the
materials of the feast." "With the greatest pleasure," said the polite
Brahmadaitya; "I'll supply you with the requirements of a feast for
a thousand Brahmans; only show me the cellars in which the provisions
are to be stored away." The Brahman improvised a store-room. The day
before the feast the store-room was overflowing with provisions. There
were one hundred jars of ghi (clarified butter), one hill of flour, one
hundred jars of sugar, one hundred jars of milk, curds, and congealed
milk, and the other thousand and one things required in a great
Brahmanical feast. The next morning one hundred Brahman pastrycooks
were employed; the thousand Brahmans ate their fill; but the host,
the Brahman of the story, did not eat. He thought he would eat with
the Brahmadaitya. But the Brahmadaitya, who was present there though
unseen, told him that he could not gratify him on that point, as by
befriending the Brahman the Brahmadaitya's allotted period had come
to an end, and the pushpaka [34] chariot had been sent to him from
heaven. The Brahmadaitya, being released from his ghostly life, was
taken up into heaven; and the Brahman lived happily for many years,
begetting sons and grandsons.


            Here my story endeth,
            The Natiya-thorn withereth, etc.







XVI

THE STORY OF A HIRAMAN [35]


There was a fowler who had a wife. The fowler's wife said to her
husband one day, "My dear, I'll tell you the reason why we are always
in want. It is because you sell every bird you catch by your rods,
whereas if we sometimes eat some of the birds you catch, we are sure
to have better luck. I propose therefore that whatever bird or birds
you bag to-day we do not sell, but dress and eat." The fowler agreed
to his wife's proposal, and went out a-bird-catching. He went about
from wood to wood with his limed rods, accompanied by his wife, but in
vain. Somehow or other they did not succeed in catching any bird till
near sundown. But just as they were returning homewards they caught
a beautiful hiraman. The fowler's wife, taking the bird in her hand
and feeling it all over, said, "What a small bird this is! how much
meat can it have? There is no use in killing it." The hiraman said,
"Mother, do not kill me, but take me to the king, and you will
get a large sum of money by selling me." The fowler and his wife
were greatly taken aback on hearing the bird speak, and they asked
the bird what price they should set upon it. The hiraman answered,
"Leave that to me; take me to the king and offer me for sale; and when
the king asks my price, say, 'The bird will tell its own price,' and
then I'll mention a large sum." The fowler accordingly went the next
day to the king's palace, and offered the bird for sale. The king,
delighted with the beauty of the bird, asked the fowler what he would
take for it. The fowler said, "O great king, the bird will tell its
own price." "What! can the bird speak?" asked the king. "Yes, my lord;
be pleased to ask the bird its price," replied the fowler. The king,
half in jest and half in seriousness, said, "Well, hiraman, what is
your price?" The hiraman answered, "Please your majesty, my price is
ten thousand rupees. Do not think that the price is too high. Count
out the money for the fowler, for I'll be of the greatest service to
your majesty." "What service can you be of to me, hiraman?" asked
the king. "Your majesty will see that in due time," replied the
hiraman. The king, surprised beyond measure at hearing the hiraman
talk, and talk so sensibly, took the bird, and ordered his treasurer
to tell down the sum of ten thousand rupees to the fowler.

The king had six queens, but he was so taken up with the bird that
he almost forgot that they lived; at any rate, his days and nights
were spent in the company, not of the queens, but of the bird. The
hiraman not only replied intelligently to every question the king
put, but it recited to him the names of the three hundred and thirty
millions of the gods of the Hindu pantheon, the hearing of which is
always regarded as an act of piety. The queens felt that they were
neglected by the king, became jealous of the bird, and determined to
kill it. It was long before they got an opportunity, as the bird was
the king's inseparable companion. One day the king went out a-hunting,
and he was to be away from the palace for two days. The six queens
determined to avail themselves of the opportunity and put an end to
the life of the bird. They said to one another, "Let us go and ask
the bird which of us is the ugliest in his estimation, and she whom
he pronounces the ugliest shall strangle the bird." Thus resolved,
they all went into the room where the bird was; but before the queens
could put any questions the bird so sweetly and so piously recited
the names of the gods and goddesses, that the hearts of them all
were melted into tenderness, and they came away without accomplishing
their purpose. The following day, however, their evil genius returned,
and they called themselves a thousand fools for having been diverted
from their purpose. They therefore determined to steel their hearts
against all pity, and to kill the bird without delay. They all went
into the room, and said to the bird, "O hiraman, you are a very wise
bird, we hear, and your judgments are all right; will you please tell
us which of us is the handsomest and which the ugliest?" The bird,
knowing the evil design of the queens, said to them, "How can I
answer your questions remaining in this cage? In order to pronounce
a correct judgment I must look minutely on every limb of you all,
both in front and behind. If you wish to know my opinion you must
set me free." The women were at first afraid of setting the bird
free lest it should fly away; but on second thoughts they set it
free after shutting all the doors and windows of the room. The bird,
on examining the room, saw that it had a water-passage through which
it was possible to escape. When the question was repeated several
times by the queens, the bird said, "The beauty of not one of you
can be compared to the beauty of the little toe of the lady that
lives beyond the seven oceans and the thirteen rivers." The queens,
on hearing their beauty spoken of in such slighting terms, became
exceedingly furious, and rushed towards the bird to tear it in pieces;
but before they could get at it, it escaped through the water-passage,
and took shelter in a wood-cutter's hut which was hard by.

The next day the king returned home from hunting, and not finding
the hiraman on its perch became mad with grief. He asked the queens,
and they told him that they knew nothing about it. The king wept day
and night for the bird, as he loved it much. His ministers became
afraid lest his reason should give way, for he used every hour of
the day to weep, saying, "O my hiraman! O my hiraman! where art thou
gone?" Proclamation was made by beat of drum throughout the kingdom
to the effect that if any person could produce before the king his pet
hiraman he would be rewarded with ten thousand rupees. The wood-cutter,
rejoiced at the idea of becoming independent for life, produced the
precious bird and obtained the reward. The king, on hearing from
the parrot that the queens had attempted to kill it, became mad with
rage. He ordered them to be driven away from the palace and put in
a desert place without food. The king's order was obeyed, and it was
rumoured after a few days that the poor queens were all devoured by
wild beasts.

After some time the king said to the parrot, "Hiraman, you said to
the queens that the beauty of none of them could be compared to the
beauty of even the little toe of the lady who lives on the other side
of the seven oceans and thirteen rivers. Do you know of any means by
which I can get at that lady?"

Hiraman. Of course I do. I can take your majesty to the door of
the palace in which that lady of peerless beauty lives; and if your
majesty will abide by my counsel, I will undertake to put that lady
into your arms.

King. I will do whatever you tell me. What do you wish me to do?

Hiraman. What is required is a pakshiraj. [36] If you can procure a
horse of that species, you can ride upon it, and in no time we shall
cross the seven oceans and thirteen rivers, and stand at the door of
the lady's palace.

King. I have, as you know, a large stud of horses; we can now go and
see if there are any pakshirajes amongst them.

The king and the hiraman went to the royal stables and examined all
the horses. The hiraman passed by all the fine-looking horses and
those of high mettle, and alighted upon a wretched-looking lean pony,
and said, "Here is the horse I want. It is a horse of the genuine
pakshiraj breed, but it must be fed full six months with the finest
grain before it can answer our purpose." The king accordingly put
that pony in a stable by itself and himself saw every day that it
was fed with the finest grain that could be got in the kingdom. The
pony rapidly improved in appearance, and at the end of six months the
hiraman pronounced it fit for service. The parrot then told the king
to order the royal silversmith to make some khais [37] of silver. A
large quantity of silver khais was made in a short time. When about
to start on their aerial journey the hiraman said to the king,
"I have one request to make. Please whip the horse only once at
starting. If you whip him more than once, we shall not be able to
reach the palace, but stick mid-way. And when we return homewards
after capturing the lady, you are also to whip the horse only once;
if you whip him more than once, we shall come only half the way and
remain there." The king then got upon the pakshiraj with the hiraman
and the silver khais and gently whipped the animal once. The horse
shot through the air with the speed of lightning, passed over many
countries, kingdoms, and empires, crossed the oceans and thirteen
rivers, and alighted in the evening at the gate of a beautiful palace.

Now, near the palace-gate there stood a lofty tree. The hiraman told
the king to put the horse in the stable hard by, and then to climb
into the tree and remain there concealed. The hiraman took the silver
khais, and with its beak began dropping khai after khai from the foot
of the tree, all through the corridors and passages, up to the door
of the bedchamber of the lady of peerless beauty. After doing this,
the hiraman perched upon the tree where the king was concealed. Some
hours after midnight, the maid-servant of the lady, who slept in
the same room with her, wishing to come out, opened the door and
noticed the silver khais lying there. She took up a few of them,
and not knowing what they were, showed them to her lady. The lady,
admiring the little silver bullets, and wondering how they could have
got there, came out of her room and began picking them up. She saw a
regular stream of them apparently issuing from near the door of her
room, and proceeding she knew not how far. She went on picking up
in a basket the bright, shining khais all through the corridors and
passages, till she came to the foot of the tree. No sooner did the
lady of peerless beauty come to the foot of the tree than the king,
agreeably to instructions previously given to him by the hiraman,
alighted from the tree and caught hold of the lady. In a moment
she was put upon the horse along with himself. At that moment the
hiraman sat upon the shoulder of the king, the king gently whipped
the horse once, and they all were whirled through the air with the
speed of lightning. The king, wishing to reach home soon with the
precious prize, and forgetful of the instructions of the hiraman,
whipped the horse again; on which the horse at once alighted on
the outskirts of what seemed a dense forest. "What have you done,
O king?" shouted out the hiraman. "Did I not tell you not to whip
the horse more than once? You have whipped him twice, and we are
done for. We may meet with our death here." But the thing was done,
and it could not be helped. The pakshiraj became powerless; and the
party could not proceed homewards. They dismounted; but they could not
see anywhere the habitations of men. They ate some fruits and roots,
and slept that night there upon the ground.

Next morning it so chanced that the king of that country came to that
forest to hunt. As he was pursuing a stag, whom he had pierced with an
arrow, he came across the king and the lady of peerless beauty. Struck
with the matchless beauty of the lady, he wished to seize her. He
whistled, and in a moment his attendants flocked around him. The lady
was made a captive, and her lover, who had brought her from her house
on the other side of the seven oceans and thirteen rivers, was not
put to death, but his eyes were put out, and he was left alone in the
forest--alone, and yet not alone, for the good hiraman was with him.

The lady of peerless beauty was taken into the king's palace,
as well as the pony of her lover. The lady said to the king that
he must not come near her for six months, in consequence of a vow
which she had taken, and which would be completed in that period of
time. She mentioned six months, as that period would be necessary for
recruiting the constitution of the pakshiraj. As the lady professed to
engage every day in religious ceremonies, in consequence of her vow,
a separate house was assigned to her, where she took the pakshiraj and
fed him with the choicest grain. But everything would be fruitless
if the lady did not meet the hiraman. But how is she to get a sight
of that bird? She adopted the following expedient. She ordered her
servants to scatter on the roof of her house heaps of paddy, grain,
and all sorts of pulse for the refreshment of birds. The consequence
was, that thousands of the feathery race came to the roof to partake
of the abundant feast. The lady was every day on the look out for
her hiraman. The hiraman, meanwhile, was in great distress in the
forest. He had to take care not only of himself, but of the now
blinded king. He plucked some ripe fruits in the forest, and gave
them to the king to eat, and he ate of them himself. This was the
manner of hiraman's life. The other birds of the forest spoke thus
to the parrot--"O hiraman, you have a miserable life of it in this
forest. Why don't you come with us to an abundant feast provided for us
by a pious lady, who scatters many maunds of pulse on the roof of her
house for the benefit of our race? We go there early in the morning
and return in the evening, eating our fill along with thousands of
other birds." The hiraman resolved to accompany them next morning,
shrewdly suspecting more in the lady's charity to birds than the
other birds thought there was in it. The hiraman saw the lady,
and had a long chat with her about the health of the blinded king,
the means of curing his blindness, and about her escape. The plan
adopted was as follows: The pony would be ready for aerial flight in
a short time--for a great part of the six months had already elapsed;
and the king's blindness could be cured if the hiraman could procure
from the chicks of the bihangama and bihangami birds, who had their
nest on the tree at the gate of the lady's palace beyond the seven
oceans and thirteen rivers, a quantity of their ordure, fresh and hot,
and apply it to the eyeballs of the blinded king. The following morning
the hiraman started on his errand of mercy, remained at night on the
tree at the gate of the palace beyond the seven oceans and thirteen
rivers, and early the next morning waited below the nest of the
birds with a leaf on his beak, into which dropped the ordure of the
chicks. That moment the hiraman flew across the oceans and rivers,
came to the forest, and applied the precious balm to the sightless
sockets of the king. The king opened his eyes and saw. In a few days
the pakshiraj was in proper trim. The lady escaped to the forest
and took the king up; and the lady, king, and hiraman all reached
the king's capital safe and sound. The king and the lady were united
together in wedlock. They lived many years together happily, and begat
sons and daughters; and the beautiful hiraman was always with them
reciting the names of the three hundred and thirty millions of gods.


            Here my story endeth,
            The Natiya-thorn withereth, etc.







XVII

THE ORIGIN OF RUBIES


There was a certain king who died leaving four sons behind him with
his queen. The queen was passionately fond of the youngest of the
princes. She gave him the best robes, the best horses, the best food,
and the best furniture. The other three princes became exceedingly
jealous of their youngest brother, and conspiring against him and their
mother, made them live in a separate house, and took possession of
the estate. Owing to overindulgence, the youngest prince had become
very wilful. He never listened to any one, not even to his mother,
but had his own way in everything. One day he went with his mother to
bathe in the river. A large boat was riding there at anchor. None of
the boatmen were in it. The prince went into the boat, and told his
mother to come into it. His mother besought him to get down from the
boat, as it did not belong to him. But the prince said, "No, mother,
I am not coming down; I mean to go on a voyage, and if you wish to
come with me, then delay not but come up at once, or I shall be off
in a trice." The queen besought the prince to do no such thing, but to
come down instantly. But the prince gave no heed to what she said, and
began to take up the anchor. The queen went up into the boat in great
haste; and the moment she was on board the boat started, and falling
into the current passed on swiftly like an arrow. The boat went on
and on till it reached the sea. After it had gone many furlongs into
the open sea, the boat came near a whirlpool, where the prince saw a
great many rubies of monstrous size floating on the waters. Such large
rubies no one had ever seen, each being in value equal to the wealth of
seven kings. The prince caught hold of half a dozen of those rubies,
and put them on board. His mother said, "Darling, don't take up those
red balls; they must belong to somebody who has been shipwrecked,
and we may be taken up as thieves." At the repeated entreaties of
his mother the prince threw them into the sea, keeping only one tied
up in his clothes. The boat then drifted towards the coast, and the
queen and the prince arrived at a certain port where they landed.

The port where they landed was not a small place; it was a large city,
the capital of a great king. Not far from the place, the queen and
her son hired a hut where they lived. As the prince was yet a boy,
he was fond of playing at marbles. When the children of the king
came out to play on a lawn before the palace, our young prince joined
them. He had no marbles, but he played with the ruby which he had in
his possession. The ruby was so hard that it broke every taw against
which it struck. The daughter of the king, who used to watch the games
from a balcony of the palace, was astonished to see a brilliant red
ball in the hand of the strange lad, and wanted to take possession
of it. She told her father that a boy of the street had an uncommonly
bright stone in his possession which she must have, or else she would
starve herself to death. The king ordered his servants to bring to him
the lad with the precious stone. When the boy was brought, the king
wondered at the largeness and brilliancy of the ruby. He had never
seen anything like it. He doubted whether any king of any country
in the world possessed so great a treasure. He asked the lad where
he had got it. The lad replied that he got it from the sea. The king
offered a thousand rupees for the ruby, and the lad not knowing its
value readily parted with it for that sum. He went with the money to
his mother, who was not a little frightened, thinking that her son
had stolen the money from some rich man's house. She became quiet,
however, on being assured that the money was given to him by the king
in exchange for the red ball which he had picked up in the sea.

The king's daughter, on getting the ruby, put it in her hair,
and, standing before her pet parrot, said to the bird, "Oh, my
darling parrot, don't I look very beautiful with this ruby in my
hair?" The parrot replied, "Beautiful! you look quite hideous with
it! What princess ever puts only one ruby in her hair? It would be
somewhat feasible if you had two at least." Stung with shame at the
reproach cast in her teeth by the parrot, the princess went into the
grief-chamber of the palace, and would neither eat nor drink. The
king was not a little concerned when he heard that his daughter
had gone into the grief-chamber. He went to her, and asked her the
cause of her grief. The princess told the king what her pet parrot
had said, and added, "Father, if you do not procure for me another
ruby like this, I'll put an end to my life by mine own hands." The
king was overwhelmed with grief. Where was he to get another ruby
like it? He doubted whether another like it could be found in the
whole world. He ordered the lad who had sold the ruby to be brought
into his presence. "Have you, young man," asked the king, "another
ruby like the one you sold me?" The lad replied, "No, I have not got
one. Why, do you want another? I can give you lots, if you wish to have
them. They are to be found in a whirlpool in the sea, far, far away. I
can go and fetch some for you." Amazed at the lad's reply, the king
offered rich rewards for procuring only another ruby of the same sort.

The lad went home and said to his mother that he must go to sea again
to fetch some rubies for the king. The woman was quite frightened
at the idea, and begged him not to go. But the lad was resolved on
going, and nothing could prevent him from carrying out his purpose. He
accordingly went alone on board that same vessel which had brought
him and his mother, and set sail. He reached the whirlpool, from
near which he had formerly picked up the rubies. This time, however,
he determined to go to the exact spot whence the rubies were coming
out. He went to the centre of the whirlpool, where he saw a gap
reaching to the bottom of the ocean. He dived into it, leaving his
boat to wheel round the whirlpool. When he reached the bottom of the
ocean he saw there a beautiful palace. He went inside. In the central
room of the palace there was the god Siva, with his eyes closed,
and absorbed apparently in intense meditation. A few feet above
Siva's head was a platform, on which lay a young lady of exquisite
beauty. The prince went to the platform and saw that the head of the
lady was separated from her body. Horrified at the sight, he did not
know what to make of it. He saw a stream of blood trickling from the
severed head, falling upon the matted head of Siva, and running into
the ocean in the form of rubies. After a little two small rods, one of
silver and one of gold, which were lying near the head of the lady,
attracted his eyes. As he took up the rods in his hands, the golden
rod accidentally fell upon the head, on which the head immediately
joined itself to the body, and the lady got up. Astonished at the
sight of a human being, the lady asked the prince who he was and how
he had got there. After hearing the story of the prince's adventures,
the lady said, "Unhappy young man, depart instantly from this place;
for when Siva finishes his meditations he will turn you to ashes
by a single glance of his eyes." The young man, however, would not
go except in her company, as he was over head and ears in love with
the beautiful lady. At last they both contrived to run away from the
palace, and coming up to the surface of the ocean they climbed into
the boat near the centre of the whirlpool, and sailed away towards
land, having previously laden the vessel with a cargo of rubies. The
wonder of the prince's mother at seeing the beautiful damsel may be
well imagined. Early next morning the prince sent a basin full of big
rubies, through a servant. The king was astonished beyond measure. His
daughter, on getting the rubies, resolved on marrying the wonderful lad
who had made a present of them to her. Though the prince had a wife,
whom he had brought up from the depths of the ocean, he consented to
have a second wife. They were accordingly married, and lived happily
for years, begetting sons and daughters.


            Here my story endeth,
            The Natiya-thorn withereth, etc.







XVIII

THE MATCH-MAKING JACKAL


Once on a time there lived a weaver, whose ancestors were very rich,
but whose father had wasted the property which he had inherited
in riotous living. He was born in a palace-like house, but he now
lived in a miserable hut. He had no one in the world, his parents
and all his relatives having died. Hard by the hut was the lair of a
jackal. The jackal, remembering the wealth and grandeur of the weaver's
forefathers, had compassion on him, and one day coming to him, said,
"Friend weaver, I see what a wretched life you are leading. I have
a good mind to improve your condition. I'll try and marry you to
the daughter of the king of this country." "I become the king's
son-in-law!" replied the weaver; "that will take place only when the
sun rises in the west." "You doubt my power?" rejoined the jackal;
"you will see, I'll bring it about."

The next morning the jackal started for the king's city, which
was many miles off. On the way he entered a plantation of the
Piper betel plant, and plucked a large quantity of its leaves. He
reached the capital, and contrived to get inside the palace. On the
premises of the palace was a tank in which the ladies of the king's
household performed their morning and afternoon ablutions. At the
entrance of that tank the jackal laid himself down. The daughter of
the king happened to come just at the time to bathe, accompanied
by her maids. The princess was not a little struck at seeing the
jackal lying down at the entrance. She told her maids to drive
the jackal away. The jackal rose as if from sleep, and instead
of running away, opened his bundle of betel-leaves, put some into
his mouth, and began chewing them. The princess and her maids were
not a little astonished at the sight. They said among themselves,
"What an uncommon jackal is this! From what country can he have
come? A jackal chewing betel-leaves! why thousands of men and women
of this city cannot indulge in that luxury. He must have come from
a wealthy land." The princess asked the jackal, "Sivalu! [38] from
what country do you come? It must be a very prosperous country where
the jackals chew betel-leaves. Do other animals in your country chew
betel-leaves?" "Dearest princess," replied the jackal, "I come from a
land flowing with milk and honey. Betel-leaves are as plentiful in my
country as the grass in your fields. All animals in my country--cows,
sheep, dogs--chew betel-leaves. We want no good thing." "Happy is the
country," said the princess, "where there is such plenty, and thrice
happy the king who rules in it!" "As for our king," said the jackal,
"he is the richest king in the world. His palace is like the heaven
of Indra. I have seen your palace here; it is a miserable hut compared
to the palace of our king." The princess, whose curiosity was excited
to the utmost pitch, hastily went through her bath, and going to the
apartments of the queen-mother, told her of the wonderful jackal lying
at the entrance of the tank. Her curiosity being excited, the jackal
was sent for. When the jackal stood in the presence of the queen, he
began munching the betel-leaves. "You come," said the queen, "from
a very rich country. Is your king married?" "Please your majesty,
our king is not married. Princesses from distant parts of the world
tried to get married to him, but he rejected them all. Happy will
that princess be whom our king condescends to marry!" "Don't you
think, Sivalu," asked the queen, "that my daughter is as beautiful
as a Peri, and that she is fit to be the wife of the proudest king
in the world?" "I quite think," said the jackal, "that the princess
is exceedingly handsome; indeed, she is the handsomest princess I
have ever seen; but I don't know whether our king will have a liking
for her." "Liking for my daughter!" said the queen, "you have only to
paint her to him as she is, and he is sure to turn mad with love. To be
serious, Sivalu, I am anxious to get my daughter married. Many princes
have sought her hand, but I am unwilling to give her to any of them,
as they are not the sons of great kings. But your king seems to be a
great king. I can have no objection to making him my son-in-law." The
queen sent word to the king, requesting him to come and see the
jackal. The king came and saw the jackal, heard him describe the
wealth and pomp of the king of his country, and expressed himself
not unwilling to give away his daughter in marriage to him.

The jackal after this returned to the weaver and said to him, "O lord
of the loom, you are the luckiest man in the world; it is all settled;
you are to become the son-in-law of a great king. I have told them that
you are yourself a great king, and you must behave yourself as one. You
must do just as I instruct you, otherwise your fortune will not only
not be made, but both you and I will be put to death." "I'll do just as
you bid me," said the weaver. The shrewd jackal drew in his own mind a
plan of the method of procedure he should adopt, and after a few days
went back to the palace of the king in the same manner in which he had
gone before, that is to say, chewing betel-leaves and lying down at
the entrance of the tank on the premises of the palace. The king and
queen were glad to see him, and eagerly asked him as to the success of
his mission. The jackal said, "In order to relieve your minds I may
tell you at once that my mission has been so far successful. If you
only knew the infinite trouble I have had in persuading his Majesty,
my sovereign, to make up his mind to marry your daughter, you would
give me no end of thanks. For a long time he would not hear of it, but
gradually I brought him round. You have now only to fix an auspicious
day for the celebration of the solemn rite. There is one bit of advice,
however, which I, as your friend, would give you. It is this. My master
is so great a king that if he were to come to you in state, attended
by all his followers, his horses and his elephants, you would find it
impossible to accommodate them all in your palace or in your city. I
would therefore propose that our king should come to your city, not
in state, but in a private manner; and that you send to the outskirts
of your city your own elephants, horses, and conveyances, to bring
him and only a few of his followers to your palace." "Many thanks,
wise Sivalu, for this advice. I could not possibly make accommodation
in my city for the followers of so great a king as your master is. I
should be very glad if he did not come in state; and trust you will
use your influence to persuade him to come in a private manner; for I
should be ruined if he came in state." The jackal then gravely said, "I
will do my best in the matter," and then returned to his own village,
after the royal astrologer had fixed an auspicious day for the wedding.

On his return the jackal busied himself with making preparations for
the great ceremony. As the weaver was clad in tatters, he told him
to go to the washermen of the village and borrow from them a suit
of clothes. As for himself, he went to the king of his race, and
told him that on a certain day he would like one thousand jackals to
accompany him to a certain place. He went to the king of crows, and
begged that his corvine majesty would be pleased to allow one thousand
of his black subjects to accompany him on a certain day to a certain
place. He preferred a similar petition to the king of paddy-birds.

At last the great day arrived. The weaver arrayed himself in the
clothes which he had borrowed from the village washermen. The jackal
made his appearance, accompanied by a train of a thousand jackals,
a thousand crows, and a thousand paddy-birds. The nuptial procession
started on their journey, and towards sundown arrived within two
miles of the king's palace. There the jackal told his friends,
the thousand jackals, to set up a loud howl; at his bidding the
thousand crows cawed their loudest; while the hoarse screechings of
the thousand paddy-birds furnished a suitable accompaniment. The
effect may be imagined. They all together made a noise the like
of which had never been heard since the world began. While this
unearthly noise was going on, the jackal himself hastened to the
palace, and asked the king whether he thought he would be able to
accommodate the wedding-party, which was about two miles distant, and
whose noise was at that moment sounding in his ears. The king said
"Impossible, Sivalu; from the sound of the procession I infer there
must be at least one hundred thousand souls. How is it possible to
accommodate so many guests? Please, so arrange that the bridegroom
only will come to my house." "Very well," said the jackal; "I told
you at the beginning that you would not be able to accommodate all
the attendants of my august master. I'll do as you wish. My master
will alone come in undress. Send a horse for the purpose." The jackal,
accompanied by a horse and groom, came to the place where his friend
the weaver was, thanked the thousand jackals, the thousand crows,
and the thousand paddy-birds, for their valuable services, and told
them all to go away, while he himself, and the weaver on horseback,
wended their way to the king's palace. The bridal party, waiting in
the palace, were greatly disappointed at the personal appearance of
the weaver; but the jackal told them that his master had purposely
put on a mean dress, as his would-be father-in-law declared himself
unable to accommodate the bridegroom and his attendants coming in
state. The royal priests now began the interesting ceremony, and the
nuptial knot was tied for ever. The bridegroom seldom opened his lips,
agreeably to the instructions of the jackal, who was afraid lest
his speech should betray him. At night when he was lying in bed he
began to count the beams and rafters of the room, and said audibly,
"This beam will make a first-rate loom, that other a capital beam,
and that yonder an excellent sley." The princess, his bride, was not
a little astonished. She began to think in her mind, "Is the man,
to whom they have tied me, a king or a weaver? I am afraid he is
the latter; otherwise why should he be talking of weaver's loom,
beam, and sley? Ah, me! is this what the fates keep in store for
me?" In the morning the princess related to the queen-mother the
weaver's soliloquy. The king and queen, not a little surprised at
this recital, took the jackal to task about it. The ready-witted
jackal at once said, "Your Majesty need not be surprised at my august
master's soliloquy. His palace is surrounded by a population of seven
hundred families of the best weavers in the world, to whom he has given
rent-free lands, and whose welfare he continually seeks. It must have
been in one of his philanthropic moods that he uttered the soliloquy
which has taken your Majesty by surprise." The jackal, however,
now felt that it was high time for himself and the weaver to decamp
with the princess, since the proverbial simplicity of his friend of
the loom might any moment involve him in danger. The jackal therefore
represented to the king, that weighty affairs of state would not permit
his august master to spend another day in the palace; that he should
start for his kingdom that very day with his bride; and his master was
resolved to travel incognito on foot, only the princess, now the queen,
should leave the city in a palki. After a great deal of yea and nay,
the king and queen at last consented to the proposal. The party came
to the outskirts of the weaver's village; the palki bearers were sent
away; and the princess, who asked where her husband's palace was,
was made to walk on foot. The weaver's hut was soon reached, and the
jackal, addressing the princess, said, "This, madam, is your husband's
palace." The princess began to beat her forehead with the palms of her
hands in sheer despair. "Ah, me! is this the husband whom Prajapati
[39] intended for me? Death would have been a thousand times better."

As there was nothing for it, the princess soon got reconciled to her
fate. She, however, determined to make her husband rich, especially as
she knew the secret of becoming rich. One day she told her husband to
get for her a pice-worth of flour. She put a little water in the flour,
and smeared her body with the paste. When the paste dried on her body,
she began wiping the paste with her fingers; and as the paste fell in
small balls from her body, it got turned into gold. She repeated this
process every day for some time, and thus got an immense quantity of
gold. She soon became mistress of more gold than is to be found in
the coffers of any king. With this gold she employed a whole army of
masons, carpenters and architects, who in no time built one of the
finest palaces in the world. Seven hundred families of weavers were
sought for and settled round about the palace. After this she wrote
a letter to her father to say that she was sorry he had not favoured
her with a visit since the day of her marriage, and that she would be
delighted if he now came to see her and her husband. The king agreed
to come, and a day was fixed. The princess made great preparations
against the day of her father's arrival. Hospitals were established in
several parts of the town for diseased, sick, and infirm animals. The
beasts in thousands were made to chew betel-leaves on the wayside. The
streets were covered with Cashmere shawls for her father and his
attendants to walk on. There was no end of the display of wealth and
grandeur. The king and queen arrived in state, and were infinitely
delighted at the apparently boundless riches of their son-in-law. The
jackal now appeared on the scene, and saluting the king and queen,
said--"Did I not tell you?"


            Here my story endeth,
            The Natiya-thorn withereth, etc.







XIX

THE BOY WITH THE MOON ON HIS FOREHEAD


There was a certain king who had six queens, none of whom bore
children. Physicians, holy sages, mendicants, were consulted,
countless drugs were had recourse to, but all to no purpose. The king
was disconsolate. His ministers told him to marry a seventh wife;
and he was accordingly on the look out.

In the royal city there lived a poor old woman who used to pick up
cow-dung from the fields, make it into cakes, dry them in the sun,
and sell them in the market for fuel. This was her only means of
subsistence. This old woman had a daughter exquisitely beautiful. Her
beauty excited the admiration of every one that saw her; and it was
solely in consequence of her surpassing beauty that three young
ladies, far above her in rank and station, contracted friendship
with her. Those three young ladies were the daughter of the king's
minister, the daughter of a wealthy merchant, and the daughter of the
royal priest. These three young ladies, together with the daughter of
the poor old woman, were one day bathing in a tank not far from the
palace. As they were performing their ablutions, each dwelt on her
own good qualities. "Look here, sister," said the minister's daughter,
addressing the merchant's daughter, "the man that marries me will be a
happy man, for he will not have to buy clothes for me. The cloth which
I once put on never gets soiled, never gets old, never tears." The
merchant's daughter said, "And my husband too will be a happy man, for
the fuel which I use in cooking never gets turned into ashes. The same
fuel serves from day to day, from year to year." "And my husband will
also become a happy man," said the daughter of the royal chaplain,
"for the rice which I cook one day never gets finished, and when
we have all eaten, the same quantity which was first cooked remains
always in the pot." The daughter of the poor old woman said in her
turn, "And the man that marries me will also be happy, for I shall
give birth to twin children, a son and a daughter. The daughter will
be divinely fair, and the son will have the moon on his forehead and
stars on the palms of his hands."

The above conversation was overheard by the king, who, as he was on
the look out for a seventh queen, used to skulk about in places where
women met together. The king thus thought in his mind--"I don't care
a straw for the girl whose clothes never tear and never get old;
neither do I care for the other girl whose fuel is never consumed;
nor for the third girl whose rice never fails in the pot. But the
fourth girl is quite charming! She will give birth to twin children,
a son and a daughter; the daughter will be divinely fair, and the
son will have the moon on his forehead and stars on the palms of his
hands. That is the girl I want. I'll make her my wife."

On making inquiries on the same day, the king found that the fourth
girl was the daughter of a poor old woman who picked up cow-dung from
the fields; but though there was thus an infinite disparity in rank,
he determined to marry her. On the very same day he sent for the
poor old woman. She, poor thing, was quite frightened when she saw
a messenger of the king standing at the door of her hut. She thought
that the king had sent for her to punish her, because, perhaps, she had
some day unwittingly picked up the dung of the king's cattle. She went
to the palace, and was admitted into the king's private chamber. The
king asked her whether she had a very fair daughter, and whether
that daughter was the friend of his own minister's and priest's
daughters. When the woman answered in the affirmative, he said to
her, "I will marry your daughter, and make her my queen." The woman
hardly believed her own ears--the thing was so strange. He, however,
solemnly declared to her that he had made up his mind, and was
determined to marry her daughter. It was soon known in the capital
that the king was going to marry the daughter of the old woman who
picked up cow-dung in the fields. When the six queens heard the news,
they would not believe it, till the king himself told them that the
news was true. They thought that the king had somehow got mad. They
reasoned with him thus--"What folly, what madness, to marry a girl
who is not fit to be our maid-servant! And you expect us to treat
her as our equal--a girl whose mother goes about picking up cow-dung
in the fields! Surely, my lord, you are beside yourself!" The king's
purpose, however, remained unshaken. The royal astrologer was called,
and an auspicious day was fixed for the celebration of the king's
marriage. On the appointed day the royal priest tied the marital knot,
and the daughter of the poor old picker-up of cow-dung in the fields
became the seventh and best beloved queen.

Some time after the celebration of the marriage, the king went for six
months to another part of his dominions. Before setting out he called
to him the seventh queen, and said to her, "I am going away to another
part of my dominions for six months. Before the expiration of that
period I expect you to be confined. But I should like to be present
with you at the time, as your enemies may do mischief. Take this golden
bell and hang it in your room. When the pains of childbirth come upon
you, ring this bell, and I will be with you in a moment in whatever
part of my dominions I may be at the time. Remember, you are to ring
the bell only when you feel the pains of childbirth." After saying this
the king started on his journey. The six queens, who had overheard the
king, went on the next day to the apartments of the seventh queen,
and said, "What a nice bell of gold you have got, sister! Where did
you get it, and why have you hung it up?" The seventh queen, in her
simplicity, said, "The king has given it to me, and if I were to ring
it, the king would immediately come to me wherever he might be at the
time." "Impossible!" said the six queens, "you must have misunderstood
the king. Who can believe that this bell can be heard at the distance
of hundreds of miles? Besides, if it could be heard, how would the king
be able to travel a great distance in the twinkling of an eye? This
must be a hoax. If you ring the bell, you will find that what the
king said was pure nonsense." The six queens then told her to make a
trial. At first she was unwilling, remembering what the king had told
her; but at last she was prevailed upon to ring the bell. The king was
at the moment half-way to the capital of his other dominions, but at
the ringing of the bell he stopped short in his journey, turned back,
and in no time stood in the queen's apartments. Finding the queen
going about in her rooms, he asked why she had rung the bell though
her hour had not come. She, without informing the king of the entreaty
of the six queens, replied that she rang the bell only to see whether
what he had said was true. The king was somewhat indignant, told her
distinctly not to ring the bell again till the moment of the coming
upon her of the pains of childbirth, and then went away. After the
lapse of some weeks the six queens again begged of the seventh queen
to make a second trial of the bell. They said to her, "The first time
when you rang the bell, the king was only at a short distance from you,
it was therefore easy for him to hear the bell and to come to you;
but now he has long ago settled in his other capital, let us see if
he will now hear the bell and come to you." She resisted for a long
time, but was at last prevailed upon by them to ring the bell. When
the sound of the bell reached the king he was in court dispensing
justice, but when he heard the sound of the bell (and no one else
heard it) he closed the court and in no time stood in the queen's
apartments. Finding that the queen was not about to be confined,
he asked her why she had again rung the bell before her hour. She,
without saying anything of the importunities of the six queens, replied
that she merely made a second trial of the bell. The king became very
angry, and said to her, "Now listen, since you have called me twice for
nothing, let it be known to you that when the throes of childbirth do
really come upon you, and you ring the bell ever so lustily, I will not
come to you. You must be left to your fate." The king then went away.

At last the day of the seventh queen's deliverance arrived. On first
feeling the pains she rang the golden bell. She waited, but the
king did not make his appearance. She rang again with all her might,
still the king did not make his appearance. The king certainly did
hear the sound of the bell; but he did not come as he was displeased
with the queen. When the six queens saw that the king did not come,
they went to the seventh queen and told her that it was not customary
with the ladies of the palace to be confined in the king's apartments;
she must go to a hut near the stables. They then sent for the midwife
of the palace, and heavily bribed her to make away with the infant
the moment it should be born into the world. The seventh queen gave
birth to a son who had the moon on his forehead and stars on the
palms of his hands, and also to an uncommonly beautiful girl. The
midwife had come provided with a couple of newly born pups. She put
the pups before the mother, saying--"You have given birth to these,"
and took away the twin-children in an earthen vessel. The queen was
quite insensible at the time, and did not notice the twins at the
time they were carried away. The king, though he was angry with the
seventh queen, yet remembering that she was destined to give birth to
the heir of his throne, changed his mind, and came to see her the next
morning. The pups were produced before the king as the offspring of
the queen. The king's anger and vexation knew no bounds. He ordered
that the seventh queen should be expelled from the palace, that she
should be clothed in leather, and that she should be employed in
the market-place to drive away crows and to keep off dogs. Though
scarcely able to move she was driven away from the palace, stripped
of her fine robes, clothed in leather, and set to drive away the
crows of the market-place.

The midwife, when she put the twins in the earthen vessel, bethought
herself of the best way to destroy them. She did not think it proper
to throw them into a tank, lest they should be discovered the next
day. Neither did she think of burying them in the ground, lest they
should be dug up by a jackal and exposed to the gaze of people. The
best way to make an end of them, she thought, would be to burn them,
and reduce them to ashes, that no trace might be left of them. But
how could she, at that dead hour of night, burn them without some
other person helping her? A happy thought struck her. There was a
potter on the outskirts of the city, who used during the day to mould
vessels of clay on his wheel, and burn them during the latter part
of the night. The midwife thought that the best plan would be to put
the vessel with the twins along with the unburnt clay vessels which
the potter had arranged in order and gone to sleep expecting to get up
late at night and set them on fire; in this way, she thought, the twins
would be reduced to ashes. She, accordingly, put the vessel with the
twins along with the unburnt clay vessels of the potter, and went away.

Somehow or other, that night the potter and his wife overslept
themselves. It was near the break of day when the potter's wife,
awaking out of sleep, roused her husband, and said, "Oh, my good man,
we have overslept ourselves; it is now near morning and I much fear it
is now too late to set the pots on fire." Hastily unbolting the door
of her cottage, she rushed out to the place where the pots were ranged
in rows. She could scarcely believe her eyes when she saw that all the
pots had been baked and were looking bright red, though neither she nor
her husband had applied any fire to them. Wondering at her good luck,
and not knowing what to make of it, she ran to her husband and said,
"Just come and see!" The potter came, saw, and wondered. The pots had
never before been so well baked. Who could have done this? This could
have proceeded only from some god or goddess. Fumbling about the pots,
he accidentally upturned one in which, lo and behold, were seen huddled
up together two newly born infants of unearthly beauty. The potter
said to his wife, "My dear, you must pretend to have given birth to
these beautiful children." Accordingly all arrangements were made,
and in due time it was given out that the twins had been born to
her. And such lovely twins they were! On the same day many women
of the neighbourhood came to see the potter's wife and the twins to
which she had given birth, and to offer their congratulations on this
unexpected good fortune. As for the potter's wife, she could not be
too proud of her pretended children, and said to her admiring friends,
"I had hardly hoped to have children at all. But now that the gods
have given me these twins, may they receive the blessings of you all,
and live for ever!"

The twins grew and were strengthened. The brother and sister, when
they played about in the fields and lanes, were the admiration of
every one who saw them; and all wondered at the uncommonly good luck
of the potter in being blessed with such angelic children. They were
about twelve years old when the potter, their reputed father, became
dangerously ill. It was evident to all that his sickness would end
in death. The potter, perceiving his last end approaching, said to
his wife, "My dear, I am going the way of all the earth; but I am
leaving to you enough to live upon; live on and take care of these
children." The woman said to her husband, "I am not going to survive
you. Like all good and faithful wives, I am determined to die along
with you. You and I will burn together on the same funeral pyre. As
for the children, they are old enough to take care of themselves,
and you are leaving them enough money." Her friends tried to dissuade
her from her purpose, but in vain. The potter died; and as his remains
were being burnt, his wife, now a widow, threw herself on the pyre,
and burnt herself to death.

The boy with the moon on his forehead--by the way, he always kept his
head covered with a turban lest the halo should attract notice--and
his sister, now broke up the potter's establishment, sold the wheel
and the pots and pans, and went to the bazaar in the king's city. The
moment they entered, the bazaar was lit up on a sudden. The shopkeepers
of the bazaar were greatly surprised. They thought some divine beings
must have entered the place. They looked upon the beautiful boy and his
sister with wonder. They begged of them to stay in the bazaar. They
built a house for them. When they used to ramble about, they were
always followed at a distance by the woman clothed in leather, who
was appointed by the king to drive away the crows of the bazaar. By
some unaccountable impulse she used also to hang about the house in
which they lived. The boy in a short time bought a horse, and went
a-hunting in the neighbouring forests. One day while he was hunting,
the king was also hunting in the same forest, and seeing a brother
huntsman the king drew near to him. The king was struck with the beauty
of the lad and a yearning for him the moment he saw him. As a deer
went past, the youth shot an arrow, and the reaction of the force
necessary to shoot the arrow made the turban of his head fall off,
on which a bright light, like that of the moon, was seen shining on
his forehead. The king saw, and immediately thought of the son with
the moon on his forehead and stars on the palms of his hands who was
to have been born of his seventh queen. The youth on letting fly the
arrow galloped off, in spite of the earnest entreaty of the king to
wait and speak to him. The king went home a sadder man than he came
out of it. He became very moody and melancholy. The six queens asked
him why he was looking so sad. He told them that he had seen in the
woods a lad with the moon on his forehead, which reminded him of the
son who was to be born of the seventh queen. The six queens tried
to comfort him in the best way they could; but they wondered who the
youth could be. Was it possible that the twins were living? Did not
the midwife say that she had burnt both the son and the daughter to
ashes? Who, then, could this lad be? The midwife was sent for by the
six queens and questioned. She swore that she had seen the twins
burnt. As for the lad whom the king had met with, she would soon
find out who he was. On making inquiries, the midwife soon found out
that two strangers were living in the bazaar in a house which the
shopkeepers had built for them. She entered the house and saw the
girl only, as the lad had again gone out a-shooting. She pretended
to be their aunt, who had gone away to another part of the country
shortly after their birth; she had been searching after them for a
long time, and was now glad to find them in the king's city near the
palace. She greatly admired the beauty of the girl, and said to her,
"My dear child, you are so beautiful, you require the kataki [40]
flower properly to set off your beauty. You should tell your brother to
plant a row of that flower in this courtyard." "What flower is that,
auntie? I never saw it." "How could you have seen it, my child? It
is not found here; it grows on the other side of the ocean, guarded
by seven hundred Rakshasas." "How, then," said the girl, "will my
brother get it?" "He may try to get it, if you speak to him," replied
the woman. The woman made this proposal in the hope that the boy with
the moon on his forehead would perish in the attempt to get the flower.

When the youth with the moon on his forehead returned from hunting,
his sister told him of the visit paid to her by their aunt, and
requested him, if possible, to get for her the kataki flower. He was
sceptical about the existence of any aunt of theirs in the world,
but he was resolved that, to please his beloved sister, he would get
the flower on which she had set her heart. Next morning, accordingly,
he started on his journey, after bidding his sister not to stir
out of the house till his return. He rode on his fleet steed, which
was of the pakshiraj [41] tribe, and soon reached the outskirts of
what seemed to him dense forests of interminable length. He descried
some Rakshasas prowling about. He went to some distance, shot with
his arrows some deer and rhinoceroses in the neighbouring thickets,
and, approaching the place where the Rakshasas were prowling about,
called out, "O auntie dear, O auntie dear, your nephew is here." A
huge Rakshasi came towards him and said, "O, you are the youth with
the moon on your forehead and stars on the palms of your hands. We
were all expecting you, but as you have called me aunt, I will
not eat you up. What is it you want? Have you brought any eatables
for me?" The youth gave her the deer and rhinoceroses which he had
killed. Her mouth watered at the sight of the dead animals, and she
began eating them. After swallowing down all the carcases, she said,
"Well, what do you want?" The youth said, "I want some kataki flowers
for my sister." She then told him that it would be difficult for
him to get the flower, as it was guarded by seven hundred Rakshasas;
however, he might make the attempt, but in the first instance he must
go to his uncle on the north side of that forest. While the youth
was going to his uncle of the north, on the way he killed some deer
and rhinoceroses, and seeing a gigantic Rakshasa at some distance,
cried out, "Uncle dear, uncle dear, your nephew is here. Auntie has
sent me to you." The Rakshasa came near and said, "You are the youth
with the moon on your forehead and stars on the palms of your hands;
I would have swallowed you outright, had you not called me uncle, and
had you not said that your aunt had sent you to me. Now, what is it you
want?" The savoury deer and rhinoceroses were then presented to him;
he ate them all, and then listened to the petition of the youth. The
youth wanted the kataki flower. The Rakshasa said, "You want the kataki
flower! Very well, try and get it if you can. After passing through
this forest, you will come to an impenetrable forest of kachiri. [42]
You will say to that forest, 'O mother kachiri! please make way for
me, or else I die.' On that the forest will open up a passage for
you. You will next come to the ocean. You will say to the ocean,
'O mother ocean! please make way for me, or else I die,' and the
ocean will make way for you. After crossing the ocean, you enter the
gardens where the kataki blooms. Good-bye; do as I have told you." The
youth thanked his Rakshasa-uncle, and went on his way. After he had
passed through the forest, he saw before him an impenetrable forest
of kachiri. It was so close and thick, and withal so bristling with
thorns, that not a mouse could go through it. Remembering the advice
of his uncle, he stood before the forest with folded hands, and said,
"O mother kachiri! please make way for me, or else I die." On a sudden
a clean path was opened up in the forest, and the youth gladly passed
through it. The ocean now lay before him. He said to the ocean, "O
mother ocean! make way for me, or else I die." Forthwith the waters
of the ocean stood up on two sides like two walls, leaving an open
passage between them, and the youth passed through dryshod.

Now, right before him were the gardens of the kataki flower. He entered
the inclosure, and found himself in a spacious palace which seemed to
be unoccupied. On going from apartment to apartment he found a young
lady of more than earthly beauty sleeping on a bedstead of gold. He
went near, and noticed two little sticks, one of gold and the other of
silver, lying in the bedstead. The silver stick lay near the feet of
the sleeping beauty, and the golden one near the head. He took up the
sticks in his hands, and as he was examining them, the golden stick
accidentally fell upon the feet of the lady. In a moment the lady
woke and sat up, and said to the youth, "Stranger, how have you come
to this dismal place? I know who you are, and I know your history. You
are the youth with the moon on your forehead and stars on the palms of
your hands. Flee, flee from this place! This is the residence of seven
hundred Rakshasas who guard the gardens of the kataki flower. They
have all gone a-hunting; they will return by sundown; and if they
find you here you will be eaten up. One Rakshasi brought me from the
earth where my father is king. She loves me very dearly, and will not
let me go away. By means of these gold and silver sticks she kills
me when she goes away in the morning, and by means of those sticks
she revives me when she returns in the evening. Flee, flee hence, or
you die!" The youth told the young lady how his sister wished very
much to have the kataki flower, how he passed through the forest
of kachiri, and how he crossed the ocean. He said also that he was
determined not to go alone, he must take the young lady along with
him. The remaining part of the day they spent together in rambling
about the gardens. As the time was drawing near when the Rakshasas
should return, the youth buried himself amid an enormous heap of
kataki flower which lay in an adjoining apartment, after killing the
young lady by touching her head with the golden stick. Just after
sunset the youth heard the sound as of a mighty tempest: it was the
return of the seven hundred Rakshasas into the gardens. One of them
entered the apartment of the young lady, revived her, and said, "I
smell a human being, I smell a human being." The young lady replied,
"How can a human being come to this place? I am the only human being
here." The Rakshasi then stretched herself on the floor, and told the
young lady to shampoo her legs. As she was going on shampooing, she
let fall a tear-drop on the Rakshasi's leg. "Why are you weeping,
my dear child?" asked the raw-eater; "why are you weeping? Is
anything troubling you?" "No, mamma," answered the young lady,
"nothing is troubling me. What can trouble me, when you have made
me so comfortable? I was only thinking what will become of me when
you die." "When I die, child?" said the Rakshasi; "shall I die? Yes,
of course all creatures die; but the death of a Rakshasa or Rakshasi
will never happen. You know, child, that deep tank in the middle part
of these gardens. Well, at the bottom of that tank there is a wooden
box, in which there are a male and a female bee. It is ordained by
fate that if a human being who has the moon on his forehead and stars
on the palms of his hands were to come here and dive into that tank,
and get hold of the same wooden box, and crush to death the male and
female bees without letting a drop of their blood fall to the ground,
then we should die. But the accomplishment of this decree of fate is,
I think, impossible. For, in the first place, there can be no such
human being who will have the moon on his forehead and stars on the
palms of his hands; and, in the second place, if there be such a man,
he will find it impossible to come to this place, guarded as it is
by seven hundred of us, encompassed by a deep ocean, and barricaded
by an impervious forest of kachiri--not to speak of the outposts and
sentinels that are stationed on the other side of the forest. And then,
even if he succeeds in coming here, he will perhaps not know the secret
of the wooden box; and even if he knows of the secret of the wooden
box, he may not succeed in killing the bees without letting a drop of
their blood fall on the ground. And woe be to him if a drop does fall
on the ground, for in that case he will be torn up into seven hundred
pieces by us. You see then, child, that we are almost immortal--not
actually, but virtually so. You may, therefore, dismiss your fears."

On the next morning the Rakshasi got up, killed the young lady by
means of the sticks, and went away in search of food along with other
Rakshasas and Rakshasis. The lad, who had the moon on his forehead
and stars on the palms of his hands, came out of the heap of flowers
and revived the young lady. The young lady recited to the young man
the whole of the conversation she had had with the Rakshasi. It was a
perfect revelation to him. He, however, lost no time in beginning to
act. He shut the heavy gates of the gardens. He dived into the tank
and brought up the wooden box. He opened the wooden box, and caught
hold of the male and female bees as they were about to escape. He
crushed them on the palms of his hands, besmearing his body with every
drop of their blood. The moment this was done, loud cries and groans
were heard around about the inclosure of the gardens. Agreeably to
the decree of fate all the Rakshasas approached the gardens and fell
down dead. The youth with the moon on his forehead took as many kataki
flowers as he could, together with their seeds, and left the palace,
around which were lying in mountain heaps the carcases of the mighty
dead, in company with the young and beautiful lady. The waters of
the ocean retreated before the youth as before, and the forest of
kachiri also opened up a passage through it; and the happy couple
reached the house in the bazaar, where they were welcomed by the
sister of the youth who had the moon on his forehead.

On the following morning the youth, as usual, went to hunt. The king
was also there. A deer passed by, and the youth shot an arrow. As
he shot, the turban as usual fell off his head, and a bright light
issued from it. The king saw and wondered. He told the youth to stop,
as he wished to contract friendship with him. The youth told him to
come to his house, and gave him his address. The king went to the
house of the youth in the middle of the day. Pushpavati--for that
was the name of the young lady that had been brought from beyond the
ocean--told the king--for she knew the whole history--how his seventh
queen had been persuaded by the other six queens to ring the bell
twice before her time, how she was delivered of a beautiful boy and
girl, how pups were substituted in their room, how the twins were
saved in a miraculous manner in the house of the potter, how they
were well treated in the bazaar, and how the youth with the moon on
his forehead rescued her from the clutches of the Rakshasas. The king,
mightily incensed with the six queens, had them, on the following day,
buried alive in the ground. The seventh queen was then brought from
the market-place and reinstated in her position; and the youth with
the moon on his forehead, and the lovely Pushpavati and their sister,
lived happily together.


            Here my story endeth,
            The Natiya-thorn withereth, etc.







XX

THE GHOST WHO WAS AFRAID OF BEING BAGGED


Once on a time there lived a barber who had a wife. They did not live
happily together, as the wife always complained that she had not enough
to eat. Many were the curtain lectures which were inflicted upon the
poor barber. The wife used often to say to her mate, "If you had not
the means to support a wife, why did you marry me? People who have not
means ought not to indulge in the luxury of a wife. When I was in my
father's house I had plenty to eat, but it seems that I have come to
your house to fast. Widows only fast; I have become a widow in your
life-time." She was not content with mere words; she got very angry
one day and struck her husband with the broomstick of the house. Stung
with shame, and abhorring himself on account of his wife's reproach
and beating, he left his house, with the implements of his craft,
and vowed never to return and see his wife's face again till he had
become rich. He went from village to village, and towards nightfall
came to the outskirts of a forest. He laid himself down at the foot
of a tree, and spent many a sad hour in bemoaning his hard lot.

It so chanced that the tree, at the foot of which the barber was
lying down, was dwelt in by a ghost. The ghost seeing a human being
at the foot of the tree naturally thought of destroying him. With
this intention the ghost alighted from the tree, and, with outspread
arms and a gaping mouth, stood like a tall palmyra tree before the
barber, and said, "Now, barber, I am going to destroy you. Who will
protect you?" The barber, though quaking in every limb through fear,
and his hair standing erect, did not lose his presence of mind, but,
with that promptitude and shrewdness which are characteristic of his
fraternity, replied, "O spirit, you will destroy me! wait a bit and
I'll show you how many ghosts I have captured this very night and
put into my bag; and right glad am I to find you here, as I shall
have one more ghost in my bag." So saying the barber produced from
his bag a small looking-glass, which he always carried about with him
along with his razors, his whet-stone, his strop and other utensils,
to enable his customers to see whether their beards had been well
shaved or not. He stood up, placed the looking-glass right against
the face of the ghost, and said, "Here you see one ghost which I have
seized and bagged; I am going to put you also in the bag to keep this
ghost company." The ghost, seeing his own face in the looking-glass,
was convinced of the truth of what the barber had said, and was filled
with fear. He said to the barber, "O, sir barber, I'll do whatever
you bid me, only do not put me into your bag. I'll give you whatever
you want." The barber said, "You ghosts are a faithless set, there is
no trusting you. You will promise, and not give what you promise." "O,
sir," replied the ghost, "be merciful to me; I'll bring to you whatever
you order; and if I do not bring it, then put me into your bag." "Very
well," said the barber, "bring me just now one thousand gold mohurs;
and by to-morrow night you must raise a granary in my house, and fill
it with paddy. Go and get the gold mohurs immediately: and if you
fail to do my bidding you will certainly be put into my bag." The
ghost gladly consented to the conditions. He went away, and in the
course of a short time returned with a bag containing a thousand gold
mohurs. The barber was delighted beyond measure at the sight of the
gold mohurs. He then told the ghost to see to it that by the following
night a granary was erected in his house and filled with paddy.

It was during the small hours of the morning that the barber, loaded
with the heavy treasure, knocked at the door of his house. His wife,
who reproached herself for having in a fit of rage struck her husband
with a broomstick, got out of bed and unbolted the door. Her surprise
was great when she saw her husband pour out of the bag a glittering
heap of gold mohurs.

The next night the poor devil, through fear of being bagged, raised
a large granary in the barber's house, and spent the live-long night
in carrying on his back large packages of paddy till the granary was
filled up to the brim. The uncle of this terrified ghost, seeing his
worthy nephew carrying on his back loads of paddy, asked what the
matter was. The ghost related what had happened. The uncle-ghost then
said, "You fool, you think the barber can bag you! The barber is a
cunning fellow; he has cheated you, like a simpleton as you are." "You
doubt," said the nephew-ghost, "the power of the barber! come and
see." The uncle-ghost then went to the barber's house, and peeped
into it through a window. The barber, perceiving from the blast of
wind which the arrival of the ghost had produced that a ghost was at
the window, placed full before it the self-same looking-glass, saying,
"Come now, I'll put you also into the bag." The uncle-ghost, seeing his
own face in the looking-glass, got quite frightened, and promised that
very night to raise another granary and to fill it, not this time with
paddy, but with rice. So in two nights the barber became a rich man,
and lived happily with his wife begetting sons and daughters.


            Here my story endeth,
            The Natiya-thorn withereth, etc.







XXI

THE FIELD OF BONES


Once on a time there lived a king who had a son. The young prince had
three friends, the son of the prime minister, the son of the prefect
of the police, and the son of the richest merchant of the city. These
four friends had great love for one another. Once on a time they
bethought themselves of seeing distant lands. They accordingly set
out one day, each one riding on a horse. They rode on and on, till
about noon they came to the outskirts of what seemed to be a dense
forest. There they rested a while, tying to the trees their horses,
which began to browse. When they had refreshed themselves, they again
mounted their horses and resumed their journey. At sunset they saw in
the depths of the forest a temple, near which they dismounted, wishing
to lodge there that night. Inside the temple there was a sannyasi,
[43] apparently absorbed in meditation, as he did not notice the four
friends. When darkness covered the forest, a light was seen inside
the temple. The four friends resolved to pass the night on the balcony
of the temple; and as the forest was infested with many wild beasts,
they deemed it safe that each of them should watch one prahara [44]
of the night, while the rest should sleep. It fell to the lot of the
merchant's son to watch during the first prahara, that is to say,
from six in the evening to nine o'clock at night. Towards the end of
his watch the merchant's son saw a wonderful sight. The hermit took
up a bone with his hand, and repeated over it some words which the
merchant's son distinctly heard. The moment the words were uttered,
a clattering sound was heard in the precincts of the temple, and
the merchant's son saw many bones moving from different parts of the
forest. The bones collected themselves inside the temple, at the foot
of the hermit, and lay there in a heap. As soon as this took place,
the watch of the merchant's son came to an end; and, rousing the son
of the prefect of the police, he laid himself down to sleep.

The prefect's son, when he began his watch, saw the hermit sitting
cross-legged, wrapped in meditation, near a heap of bones, the
history of which he, of course, did not know. For a long time nothing
happened. The dead stillness of the night was broken only by the howl
of the hyaena and the wolf, and the growl of the tiger. When his time
was nearly up he saw a wonderful sight. The hermit looked at the heap
of bones lying before him, and uttered some words which the prefect's
son distinctly heard. No sooner had the words been uttered than a
noise was heard among the bones, "and behold a shaking, and the bones
came together, bone to its bone"; and the bones which were erewhile
lying together in a heap now took the form of a skeleton. Struck with
wonder, the prefect's son would have watched longer, but his time
was over. He therefore laid himself down to sleep, after rousing the
minister's son, to whom, however, he told nothing of what he had seen,
as the merchant's son had not told him anything of what he had seen.

The minister's son got up, rubbed his eyes, and began watching. It
was the dead hour of midnight, when ghosts, hobgoblins, and spirits of
every name and description, go roaming over the wide world, and when
all creation, both animate and inanimate, is in deep repose. Even
the howl of the wolf and the hyaena and the growl of the tiger had
ceased. The minister's son looked towards the temple, and saw the
hermit sitting wrapt up in meditation; and near him lying something
which seemed to be the skeleton of some animal. He looked towards
the dense forest and the darkness all around, and his hair stood
on end through terror. In this state of fear and trembling he spent
nearly three hours, when an uncommon sight in the temple attracted
his notice. The hermit, looking at the skeleton before him, uttered
some words which the minister's son distinctly heard. As soon as
the words were uttered, "lo, the sinews and the flesh came up upon
the bones, and the skin covered them above"; but there was no breath
in the skeleton. Astonished at the sight, the minister's son would
have sat up longer, but his time was up. He therefore laid himself
down to sleep, after having roused the king's son, to whom, however,
he said nothing of what he had seen and heard.

The king's son, when he began his watch, saw the hermit sitting,
completely absorbed in devotion, near a figure which looked like
some animal, but he was not a little surprised to see the animal
lying apparently lifeless, without showing any of the symptoms of
life. The prince spent his hours agreeably enough, especially as he
had had a long sleep, and as he felt none of that depression which
the dead hour of midnight sheds on the spirits; and he amused himself
with marking how the shades of darkness were becoming thinner and
paler every moment. But just as he noticed a red streak in the east,
he heard a sound from inside the temple. He turned his eyes towards
the hermit. The hermit, looking towards the inanimate figure of the
animal lying before him, uttered some words which the prince distinctly
heard. The moment the words were spoken, "breath came into the animal;
it lived, it stood up upon its feet"; and quickly rushed out of the
temple into the forest. That moment the crows cawed; the watch of the
prince came to an end; his three companions were roused; and after
a short time they mounted their horses, and resumed their journey,
each one thinking of the strange sight seen in the temple.

They rode on and on through the dense and interminable forest, and
hardly spoke to one another, till about mid-day they halted under a
tree near a pool for refreshment. After they had refreshed themselves
with eating some fruits of the forest and drinking water from the
pool, the prince said to his three companions, "Friends, did you not
see something in the temple of the devotee? I'll tell you what I saw,
but first let me hear what you all saw. Let the merchant's son first
tell us what he saw as he had the first watch; and the others will
follow in order."

Merchant's son. I'll tell you what I saw. I saw the hermit take up
a bone in his hand, and repeat some words which I well remember. The
moment those words were uttered, a clattering sound was heard in the
precincts of the temple, and I saw many bones running into the temple
from different directions. The bones collected themselves together
inside the temple at the feet of the hermit, and lay there in a heap. I
would have gladly remained longer to see the end, but my time was up,
and I had to rouse my friend, the son of the prefect of the police.

Prefect's son. Friends, this is what I saw. The hermit looked at
the heap of bones lying before him, and uttered some words which
I well remember. No sooner had the words been uttered than I heard
a noise among the bones, and, strange to say, the bones jumped up,
each bone joined itself to its fellow, and the heap became a perfect
skeleton. At that moment my watch came to an end, and I had to rouse
my respected friend the minister's son.

Minister's son. Well, when I began my watch I saw the said skeleton
lying near the hermit. After three mortal hours, during which I was
in great fear, I saw the hermit lift his eyes towards the skeleton
and utter some words which I well remember. As soon as the words were
uttered the skeleton was covered with flesh and hair, but it did not
show any symptom of life, as it lay motionless. Just then my watch
ended, and I had to rouse my royal friend the prince.

King's son. Friends, from what you yourselves saw, you can guess what
I saw. I saw the hermit turn towards the skeleton covered with skin and
hair, and repeat some words which I well remember. The moment the words
were uttered, the skeleton stood up on its feet, and it looked a fine
and lusty deer, and while I was admiring its beauty, it skipped out
of the temple, and ran into the forest. That moment the crows cawed.

The four friends, after hearing one another's story, congratulated
themselves on the possession of supernatural power, and they did not
doubt but that if they pronounced the words which they had heard the
hermit utter, the utterance would be followed by the same results. But
they resolved to verify their power by an actual experiment. Near
the foot of the tree they found a bone lying on the ground, and they
accordingly resolved to experiment upon it. The merchant's son took
up the bone, and repeated over it the formula he had heard from
the hermit. Wonderful to relate, a hundred bones immediately came
rushing from different directions, and lay in a heap at the foot of
the tree. The son of the prefect of the police then looking upon the
heap of bones, repeated the formula which he had heard from the hermit,
and forthwith there was a shaking among the bones; the several bones
joined themselves together, and formed themselves into a skeleton, and
it was the skeleton of a quadruped. The minister's son then drew near
the skeleton, and, looking intently upon it, pronounced over it the
formula which he had heard from the hermit. The skeleton immediately
was covered with flesh, skin, and hair, and, horrible to relate,
the animal proved itself to be a royal tiger of the largest size. The
four friends were filled with consternation. If the king's son were,
by the repetition of the formula he had heard from the hermit, to make
the beast alive, it might prove fatal to them all. The three friends,
therefore, tried to dissuade the prince from giving life to the
tiger. But the prince would not comply with the request. He naturally
said, "The mantras [45] which you have learned have been proved true
and efficacious. But how shall I know that the mantra which I have
learned is equally efficacious? I must have my mantra verified. Nor
is it certain that we shall lose our lives by the experiment. Here
is this high tree. You can climb into its topmost branches, and
I shall also follow you thither after pronouncing the mantra." In
vain did the three friends dwell upon the extreme danger attending
the experiment: the prince remained inexorable. The minister's son,
the prefect's son, and the merchant's son climbed up into the topmost
branches of the tree, while the king's son went up to the middle of
the tree. From there, looking intently upon the lifeless tiger, he
pronounced the words which he had learned from the hermit, and quickly
ran up the tree. In the twinkling of an eye the tiger stood upright,
gave out a terrible growl, with a tremendous spring killed all the
four horses which were browsing at a little distance, and, dragging
one of them, rushed towards the densest part of the forest. The four
friends ensconced on the branches of the tree were almost petrified
with fear at the sight of the terrible tiger; but the danger was now
over. The tiger went off at a great distance from them, and from its
growl they judged that it must be at least two miles distance from
them. After a little they came down from the tree; and as they now had
no horses on which to ride, they walked on foot through the forest,
till, coming to its end, they reached the shore of the sea. They sat
on the sea-shore hoping to see some ship sailing by. They had not sat
long, when fortunately they descried a vessel in the offing. They
waved their handkerchiefs, and made all sorts of signs to attract
the notice of the people on board the ship. The captain and the crew
noticed the men on the shore. They came towards the shore, took the
men upon board, but added that as they were short of provisions they
could not have them a long time on board, but would put them ashore
at the first port they came to. After four or five days' voyage, they
saw not far from the shore high buildings and turrets, and supposing
the place to be a large city, the four friends landed there.

The four friends, immediately after landing, walked along a long avenue
of stately trees, at the end of which was a bazaar. There were hundreds
of shops in the bazaar, but not a single human being in them. There
were sweetmeat shops in which there were heaps of confectioneries
ranged in regular rows, but no human beings to sell them. There was
the blacksmith's shop, there was the anvil, there were the bellows
and the other tools of the smithy, but there was no smith there. There
were stalls in which there were heaps of faded and dried vegetables,
but no men or women to sell them. The streets were all deserted, no
human beings, no cattle were to be seen there. There were carts, but no
bullocks; there were carriages, but no horses. The doors and windows
of the houses of the city on both sides of the streets were all open,
but no human being was visible in them. It seemed to be a deserted
city. It seemed to be a city of the dead--and all the dead taken out
and buried. The four friends were astonished--they were frightened
at the sight. As they went on, they approached a magnificent pile of
buildings, which seemed to be the palace of a king. They went to the
gate and to the porter's lodge. They saw shields, swords, spears, and
other weapons suspended in the lodge, but no porters. They entered the
premises, but saw no guards, no human beings. They went to the stables,
saw the troughs, grain, and grass lying about in profusion, but no
horses. They went inside the palace, passed the long corridors--still
no human being was visible. They went through six long courts--still
no human being. They entered the seventh court, and there and then,
for the first time, did they see living human beings. They saw
coming towards them four princesses of matchless beauty. Each of
these four princesses caught hold of the arm of each of the four
friends; and each princess called each man whom she had caught hold
of her husband. The princesses said that they had been long waiting
for the four friends, and expressed great joy at their arrival. The
princesses took the four friends into the innermost apartments, and
gave them a sumptuous feast. There were no servants attending them,
the princesses themselves bringing in the provisions and setting
them before the four friends. At the outset the four princesses
told the four friends that no questions were to be asked about the
depopulation of the city. After this, each princess went into her
private apartment along with her newly-found husband. Shortly after
the prince and princess had retired into their private apartment,
the princess began to shed tears. On the prince inquiring into the
cause, the princess said, "O prince! I pity you very much. You seem,
by your bearing, to be the son of a king, and you have, no doubt,
the heart of a king's son; I will therefore tell you my whole story,
and the story of my three companions who look like princesses. I am the
daughter of a king, whose palace this is, and those three creatures,
who are dressed like princesses, and who have called your three friends
their husbands, are Rakshasis. They came to this city some time ago;
they ate up my father, the king, my mother, the queen, my brothers,
my sisters, of whom I had a large number. They ate up the king's
ministers and servants. They ate up gradually all the people of the
city, all my father's horses and elephants, and all the cattle of the
city. You must have noticed, as you came to the palace, that there
are no human beings, no cattle, no living thing in this city. They
have all been eaten up by those three Rakshasis. They have spared me
alone--and that, I suppose, only for a time. When the Rakshasis saw
you and your friends from a distance, they were very glad, as they
mean to eat you all up after a short time."

King's son. But if this is the case, how do I know that you are not
a Rakshasi yourself? Perhaps you mean to swallow me up by throwing
me off my guard.

Princess. I'll mention one fact which proves that those three creatures
are Rakshasis, while I am not. Rakshasis, you know, eat food a hundred
times larger in quantity than men or women. What the Rakshasis eat at
table along with us is not sufficient to appease their hunger. They
therefore go out at night to distant lands in search of men or cattle,
as there are none in this city. If you ask your friends to watch and
see whether their wives remain all night in their beds, they will find
they go out and stay away a good part of the night, whereas you will
find me the whole night with you. But please see that the Rakshasis do
not get the slightest inkling of all this; for if they hear of it, they
will kill me in the first instance, and afterwards swallow you all up.

The next day the king's son called together the minister's son,
the prefect's son, and the merchant's son, and held a consultation,
enjoining the strictest secrecy on all. He told them what he had heard
from the princess, and requested them to lie awake in their beds to
watch whether their pretended princesses went out at night or not. One
presumptive argument in favour of the assertion of the princess was
that all the pretended princesses were fast asleep during the whole of
the day in consequence of their nightly wanderings, whereas the female
friend of the king's son did not sleep at all during the day. The
three friends accordingly lay in their beds at night pretending to
be asleep and manifesting all the symptoms of deep sleep. Each one
observed that his female friend at a certain hour, thinking her mate
to be in deep sleep, left the room, stayed away the whole night,
and returned to her bed only at dawn. During the following day each
female friend slept out nearly the whole day, and woke up only in the
afternoon. For two nights and days the three friends observed this. The
king's son also remained awake at night pretending to be asleep, but
the princess was not observed for a single moment to leave the room,
nor was she observed to sleep in the day. From these circumstances
the friends of the king's son began to suspect that their partners
were really Rakshasis as the princess said they were.

By way of confirmation the princess also told the king's son, that the
Rakshasis, after eating the flesh of men and animals, threw the bones
towards the north of the city, where there was an immense collection
of them. The king's son and his three friends went one day towards
that part of the city, and sure enough they saw there immense heaps
of the bones of men and animals piled up into hills. From this they
became more and more convinced that the three women were Rakshasis
in deed and truth.

The question now was how to run away from these devourers of men
and animals? There was one circumstance greatly in favour of the
four friends, and that was, that the three Rakshasis slept during
nearly the whole day; they had therefore the greater part of the
day for the maturing of their plans. The princess advised them to go
towards the sea-shore, and watch if any ships sailed that way. The
four friends accordingly used to go to the sea-shore looking for
ships. They were always accompanied by the princess, who took the
precaution of carrying with her in a bundle her most valuable jewels,
pearls and precious stones. It happened one day that they saw a ship
passing at a great distance from the shore. They made signs which
attracted the notice of the captain and crew. The ship came towards
the land, and the four friends and princess were, after much entreaty,
taken up. The princess exhorted the crew to row with all their might,
for which she promised them a handsome reward; for she knew that the
Rakshasis would awake in the afternoon, and immediately come after the
ship; and they would assuredly catch hold of the vessel and destroy
all the crew and passengers if it stood short of eighty miles from
land, for the Rakshasis had the power of distending their bodies to
the length of ten Yojanas. [46] The four friends and the princess
cheered on the crew, and the oarsmen rowed with all their might; and
the ship, favoured by the wind, shot over the deep like lightning. It
was near sun-down when a terrible yell was heard on the shore. The
Rakshasis had wakened from their sleep, and not finding either the
four friends or the princess, naturally thought they had got hold
of a ship and were escaping. They therefore ran along the shore with
lightning rapidity, and seeing the ship afar off they distended their
bodies. But fortunately the vessel was more than eighty miles off
land, though only a trifle more: indeed, the ship was so dangerously
near that the heads of the Rakshasis with their widely-distended
jaws almost touched its stern. The words which the Rakshasis uttered
in the hearing of the crew and passengers were--"O sister, so you
are going to eat them all yourself alone." The minister's son, the
prefect's son, and the merchant's son had all along a suspicion that
the pretended princess, the prince's partner, might after all also
be a Rakshasi; that suspicion was now confirmed by what they heard
the three Rakshasis say. Those words, however, produced no effect in
the mind of the king's son, as from his intimate acquaintance with
the princess he could not possibly take her to be a Rakshasi.

The captain told the four friends and princess that as he was bound
for distant regions in search of gold mines, he could not take
them along with him; he, therefore, proposed that on the next day
he should put them ashore near some port, especially as they were
now safe from the clutches of the Rakshasis. On the following day
no port was visible for a long time; towards the evening, however,
they came near a port where the four friends and the princess were
landed. After walking some distance, the princess, who had never been
accustomed to take long walks, complained of fatigue and hunger; they
all therefore sat under a tree, and the king's son sent the merchant's
son to buy some sweetmeats in the bazaar which they heard was not far
off. The merchant's son did not return, as he was fully persuaded in
his mind that the king's son's partner was as real a Rakshasi as the
three others from whose clutches he had escaped. Seeing the delay of
the merchant's son, the king's son sent the prefect's son after him;
but neither did he return, he being also convinced that the pretended
princess was a Rakshasi. The minister's son was next sent; but he also
joined the other two. The king's son then himself went to the shop
of the sweetmeat seller where he met his three friends, who made him
remain with them by main force, earnestly declaring that the woman
was no princess, but a real Rakshasi like the other three. Thus the
princess was deserted by the four friends who returned to their own
country, full of the adventures they had met with.

In the meantime the princess walked to the bazaar and found shelter
for a few days in the house of a poor woman, after which she set
out for the city of the four friends, the name and whereabouts of
which city she had learnt from the king's son. On arriving at the
city, she sold some of her costly ornaments, pearls and precious
stones, and hired a stately house for her residence with a suitable
establishment. She caused herself to be proclaimed as a heaven-born
dice-player, and challenged all the players in the city to play, the
conditions of the game being that if she lost it she would give the
winner a lakh [47] of rupees, and if she won it she should get a lakh
from him who lost the game. She also got authority from the king of
the country to imprison in her own house any one who could not pay her
the stipulated sum of money. The merchant's son, the prefect's son,
and the minister's son, who all looked upon themselves as miraculous
players, played with the princess, paid her many lakhs, but being
unable to pay her all the sums they owed her, were imprisoned in her
house. At last the king's son offered to play with her. The princess
purposely allowed him to win the first game, which emboldened him to
play many times, in all of which he was the loser; and being unable to
pay the many lakhs owing her, the prince was about to be dragged into
the dungeon, when the princess told him who she was. The merchant's
son, the prefect's son, and the minister's son were brought out of
their cells; and the joy of the four friends knew no bounds. The
king and the queen received their daughter-in-law with open arms,
and with demonstrations of great festivity.

Every one in the palace was glad except the princess. She could not
forget that her parents, her brothers and sisters had been devoured
by the Rakshasis, and that their bones, along with the bones of her
father's subjects, stood in mountain heaps on the north side of the
capital. The prince had told her that he and his three friends had
the power of giving life to bones. They could then reconstruct the
frames of her parents and other relatives; but the difficulty lay
in this--how to kill the three Rakshasis. Could not the hermit, who
taught them to give life, not teach also how to take away life? In all
likelihood he could. Reasoning in this manner, the four friends and
the princess went to the temple of the hermit in the forest, prayed
to him to give them the secret of destroying life from a distance by a
charm. The hermit became propitious, and granted the boon. A deer was
passing by at the moment. The hermit took a handful of water, repeated
over it some words which the king's son distinctly heard, and threw
it upon the deer. The deer died in a moment. He repeated other words
over the dead animal, the deer jumped up and ran away into the forest.

Armed with this killing charm, the king's son, together with
the princess and the three friends, went to his father-in-law's
capital. As they approached the city of death, the three Rakshasis
ran furiously towards them with open jaws. The king's son spilled
charmed water upon them, and they died in an instant. They all then
went to the heaps of bones. The merchant's son brought together the
proper bones of the bodies, the prefect's son constructed them into
skeletons, the minister's son clothed them with sinews, flesh, and
skin, and the king's son gave them life. The princess was entranced
at the sight of the re-animation of her parents and other relatives,
and her eyes were filled with tears of joy. After a few days which
they spent in great festivity, they left the revivified city, went
to their own country, and lived many years in great happiness.


            Here my story endeth,
            The Natiya-thorn withereth, etc.







XXII

THE BALD WIFE


A certain man had two wives, the younger of whom he loved more than
the elder. The younger wife had two tufts of hair on her head, and
the elder only one. The man went to a distant town for merchandise;
so the two wives lived together in the house. But they hated each
other: the younger one, who was her husband's favourite, ill-treated
the other. She made her do all the menial work in the house; rebuked
her all day and night; and did not give her enough to eat. One day
the younger wife said to the elder, "Come and take away all the lice
from the hair of my head." While the elder wife was searching among the
younger one's hair for the vermin, one lock of hair by chance gave way;
on which the younger one, mightily incensed, tore off the single tuft
that was on the head of the elder wife, and drove her away from the
house. The elder wife, now become completely bald, determined to go
into the forest, and there either die of starvation or be devoured by
some wild beast. On her way she passed by a cotton plant. She stopped
near it, made for herself a broom with some sticks which lay about,
and swept clean the ground round about the plant. The plant was much
pleased, and gave her a blessing. She wended on her way, and now saw
a plantain tree. She swept the ground round about the plantain tree
which, being pleased with her, gave her a blessing. As she went on
she saw the shed of a Brahmani bull. As the shed was very dirty,
she swept the place clean, on which the bull, being much pleased,
blessed her. She next saw a tulasi plant, bowed herself down before
it, and cleaned the place round about, on which the plant gave her
a blessing. As she was going on in her journey she saw a hut made of
branches of trees and leaves, and near it a man sitting cross-legged,
apparently absorbed in meditation. She stood for a moment behind
the venerable muni. "Whoever you may be," he said, "come before me;
do not stand behind me; if you do, I will reduce you to ashes." The
woman, trembling with fear, stood before the muni. "What is your
petition?" asked the muni. "Father Muni," answered the woman, "thou
knowest how miserable I am, since thou art all-knowing. My husband
does not love me, and his other wife, having torn off the only tuft
of hair on my head, has driven me away from the house. Have pity
upon me, Father Muni!" The muni, continuing sitting, said, "Go into
the tank which you see yonder. Plunge into the water only once, and
then come to me again." The woman went to the tank, washed in it,
and plunged into the water only once, according to the bidding of
the muni. When she got out of the water, what a change was seen in
her! Her head was full of jet black hair, which was so long that it
touched her heels; her complexion had become perfectly fair; and she
looked young and beautiful. Filled with joy and gratitude, she went
to the muni, and bowed herself to the ground. The muni said to her,
"Rise, woman. Go inside the hut, and you will find a number of wicker
baskets, and bring out any you like." The woman went into the hut,
and selected a modest-looking basket. The muni said, "Open the
basket." She opened it, and found it filled with ingots of gold,
pearls and all sorts of precious stones. The muni said, "Woman,
take that basket with you. It will never get empty. When you take
away the present contents their room will be supplied by another set,
and that by another, and that by another, and the basket will never
become empty. Daughter, go in peace." The woman bowed herself down
to the ground in profound but silent gratitude, and went away.

As she was returning homewards with the basket in her hand, she passed
by the tulasi plant whose bottom she had swept. The tulasi plant said
to her, "Go in peace, child! thy husband will love thee warmly." She
next came to the shed of the Brahmani bull, who gave her two shell
ornaments which were twined round its horns, saying, "Daughter, take
these shells, put them on your wrists, and whenever you shake either
of them you will get whatever ornaments you wish to obtain." She then
came to the plantain tree, which gave her one of its broad leaves,
saying, "Take, child, this leaf; and when you move it you will get
not only all sorts of delicious plantains, but all kinds of agreeable
food." She came last of all to the cotton plant, which gave her one
of its own branches, saying, "Daughter, take this branch; and when
you shake it you will get not only all sorts of cotton clothes, but
also of silk and purple. Shake it now in my presence." She shook the
branch, and a fabric of the finest glossy silk fell on her lap. She
put on that silk cloth, and wended on her way with the shells on her
wrists, and the basket and the branch and the leaf in her hands.

The younger wife was standing at the door of her house, when she
saw a beautiful woman approach her. She could scarcely believe her
eyes. What a change! The old, bald hag turned into the very Queen
of Beauty herself! The elder wife, now grown rich and beautiful,
treated the younger wife with kindness. She gave her fine clothes,
costly ornaments, and the richest viands. But all to no purpose. The
younger wife envied the beauty and hair of her associate. Having heard
that she got it all from Father Muni in the forest, she determined to
go there. Accordingly she started on her journey. She saw the cotton
plant, but did nothing to it; she passed by the plantain tree, the
shed of the Brahmani bull, and the tulasi plant, without taking any
notice of them. She approached the muni. The muni told her to bathe in
the tank, and plunge only once into the water. She gave one plunge,
at which she got a glorious head of hair and a beautifully fair
complexion. She thought a second plunge would make her still more
beautiful. Accordingly she plunged into the water again, and came
out as bald and ugly as before. She came to the muni, and wept. The
sage drove her away, saying, "Be off, you disobedient woman. You will
get no boon from me." She went back to her house mad with grief. The
lord of the two women returned from his travels and was struck with
the long locks and beauty of his first wife. He loved her dearly;
and when he saw her secret and untold resources and her incredible
wealth, he almost adored her. They lived together happily for many
years, and had for their maid-servant the younger woman, who had been
formerly his best beloved.




LA MORTE AMOREUSE

BY THEOPHILE GAUTIER

_Theophile Gautier (born 1811, died 1872) began life as a painter,
turned to poetry and finally adopted prose forms for the expression
of his ideas.  Always an enthusiastic apostle of romanticism, he
lived in an atmosphere of Oriental splendor.  His style is unusually
rich and sensuous, and has exerted a considerable influence on the
present generation of writers._



LA MORTE AMOREUSE

THÉOPHILE GAUTIER

Have I ever loved, you ask me, my brother?  Yes, I have loved!  The
story is dread and marvelous, and, for all my threescore years, I
scarce dare stir the ashes of that memory.  To you I can refuse
nothing; to a heart less steeled than yours this tale could never be
told by me.  For these things were so strange that I can scarce
believe they came into my own existence.  Three long years was I the
puppet of a delusion of the devil.  Three long years was I a parish
priest by day, while by night, in dreams (God grant they were but
dreams!), I led the life of a child of this world, of a lost soul!
For one kind glance at a woman's face was my spirit to be doomed; but
at length, with God to aid and my patron saint, it was given to me to
drive away the evil spirit that possessed me.

I lived a double life, by night and by day.  All day long was I a
pure priest of the Lord, concerned only with prayer and holy things;
but no sooner did I close my eyes in sleep than I was a young knight,
a lover of women, of horses, of hounds, a drinker, a dicer, a
blasphemer, and, when I woke at dawn, meseemed that I was fallen on
sleep, and did but dream that I was a priest.  For those years of
dreaming certain memories yet remain with me; memories of words and
things that will not down.  Ay, though I have never left the walls of
my vicarage, he who heard me would rather take me for one that had
lived in the world and left it, to die in religion, and end in the
breast of God his tumultuous days, than for a priest grown old in a
forgotten curé, deep in a wood, and far from the things of this earth.

Yes, I have loved as never man loved, with a wild love and a
terrible, so that I marvel my heart did not burst in twain.  Oh, the
nights of long ago!

From my earliest childhood had I felt the call to be a priest.  This
was the end of all my studies, and, till I was twenty-four, my days
were one long training.  My theological course achieved, I took the
lesser orders, and at length, at the end of Holy Week, was to be the
hour of my ordination.

I had never entered the world; my world was the college close.
Vaguely I knew that woman existed, but of woman I never thought.  My
heart was wholly pure.  Even my old and infirm mother I saw but twice
a year; of other worldly relations I had none.

I had no regrets and no hesitation in taking the irrevocable vow;
nay, I was full of an impatient joy.  Never did a young bridegroom so
eagerly count the hours of his wedding.  In my broken sleep I dreamed
of saying the Mass.  To be a priest seemed to me the noblest thing in
the world, and I would have disdained the estate of poet or of king.
To be a priest!  My ambition saw nothing higher.

All this I tell you that you may know how little I deserve that which
befell me; that you may know how inexplicable was the fascination by
which I was overcome.

The great day came, and I walked to church as if I were winged or
trod on air.  I felt an angelic beatitude, and marveled at the gloomy
and thoughtful faces of my companions, for we were many.  The night I
had passed in prayer.  I was all but entranced in ecstasy.  The
bishop, a venerable old man, was in my eyes like God the Father bowed
above His own eternity, and I seemed to see heaven open beyond the
arches of the minster.

You know the ceremony: the Benediction, the Communion in both kinds,
the anointing of the palms of the hands with consecrated oil, and
finally the celebration of the Holy Rite, offered up in company with
the bishop.  On these things I will not linger, but oh, how true is
the word of Job, that he is foolish who maketh not a covenant with
his eyes!  I chanced to raise my head and saw before me, so near that
it seemed I could touch her, though in reality she was at some
distance, and on the farther side of the railing, a young dame
royally clad, and of incomparable beauty.

It was as if scales had fallen from my eyes; and I felt like a blind
man who suddenly recovers his sight.  The bishop, so splendid a
moment ago, seemed to fade; through all the church was darkness, and
the candles paled in their sconces of gold, like stars at dawn.
Against the gloom that lovely thing shone out like a heavenly
revelation, seeming herself to be the fountain of light, and to give
it rather than receive it.  I cast down my eyes, vowing that I would
not raise them again; my attention was failing, and I scarce knew
what I did.  The moment afterward, I opened my eyes, for through my
eyelids I saw her glittering in a bright penumbra, as when one has
stared at the sun.  Ah! how beautiful she was!  The greatest
painters, when they have sought in heaven for ideal beauty, and have
brought to earth the portrait of our Lady, come never near the glory
of this vision!  Pen of poet, or palette of painter, can give no idea
of her.  She was tall, with the carriage of a goddess; her fair hair
flowed about her brows in rivers of gold.  Like a crowned queen she
stood there, with her broad white brow, and dark eyebrows; with her
eyes that had the brightness and life of the green sea, and at one
glance made or marred the destiny of a man.  They were astonishingly
clear and brilliant, shooting rays like arrows, which I could
actually see winging straight for my heart.  I know not if the flame
that lighted them came from heaven or hell, but from one or other
assuredly it came.

Angel or devil, or both; this woman was no child of Eve, the mother
of us all.  White teeth shone in her smile, little dimples came and
went with each movement of her mouth, among the roses of her cheeks.
There was a lustre as of agate on the smooth and shining skin of her
half-clad shoulders, and chains of great pearls no whiter than her
neck fell over her breast.  From time to time she lifted her head in
snake-like motion, and set the silvery ruffles of her raiment
quivering.  She wore a flame-colored velvet robe, and from the ermine
lining of her sleeves her delicate hands came and went as transparent
as the fingers of the dawn.  As I gazed on her, I felt within me as
it were the opening of gates that had ever been barred; I saw sudden
vistas of an unknown future; all life seemed altered, new thoughts
wakened in my heart.  A horrible pain took possession of me; each
minute seemed at once a moment and an age.  The ceremony went on and
on, and I was being carried far from the world, at whose gates my new
desires were beating.  I said "Yes," when I wished to say "No," when
my whole soul protested against the words my tongue was uttering.  A
hidden force seemed to drag them from me.  This it is perhaps which
makes so many young girls walk to the altar with the firm resolve to
refuse the husband who is forced on them, and this is why not one of
them does what she intends.  This is why so many poor novices take
the veil, though they are determined to tear it into shreds, rather
than pronounce the vows.  None dares cause so great a scandal before
so many observers, nor thus betray such general expectation.  The
will of all imposes itself on you; the gaze of all weighs upon you
like a cope of lead.  And again, all is so clearly arranged in
advance, so evidently irrevocable, that the intention of refusal is
crushed, and disappears.

The expression of the unknown beauty changed as the ceremony
advanced.  Tender and caressing at first, it became contemptuous and
disdainful.  With an effort that might have moved a mountain, I
strove to cry out that I would never be a priest; it was in vain; my
tongue clave to the roof of my mouth; I could not refuse even by a
sign.  Though wide awake, I seemed to be in one of those nightmares,
wherein for your life you can not utter the word on which your life
depends.  She appeared to understand the torture which I endured, and
cast on me a glance of divine pity and divine promise.  "Be mine,"
she seemed to say, "and I shall make thee happier than God and
heaven, and His angels will be jealous of thee.  Tear that shroud of
death wherein thou art swathed, for I am beauty, and I am youth, and
I am life; come to me and we shall be love.  What can Jehovah offer
thee in exchange for thy youth?  Our life will flow like a dream in
the eternity of a kiss.  Spill but the wine from that chalice, and
thou are free, and I will carry thee to the unknown isles, and thou
shalt sleep on my breast in a bed of gold beneath a canopy of silver,
for I love thee and would fain take thee from thy God, before whom so
many noble hearts pour forth the incense of their love, which dies
before it reaches the heaven where He dwells."  These words I seemed
to hear singing in the sweetest of tunes, for there was a music in
her look, and the words which her eyes sent to me resounded in my
heart as if they had been whispered in my soul.  I was ready to
foreswear God, and yet I went duly through each rite of the ceremony.
She cast me a second glance, so full of entreaty and despair, that I
felt more swords pierce my breast than stabbed the heart of our Lady
of Sorrows.

It was over, and I was a priest.

Then never did human face declare so keen a sorrow: the girl who sees
her betrothed fall dead at her side, the mother by the empty cradle
of her child, Eve at the gate of Paradise, the miser who seeks his
treasure and finds a stone, even they look less sorely smitten, less
inconsolable.

The blood left her fair face pale, white as marble she seemed; her
lovely arms fell powerless, her feet failed beneath her, and she
leaned against a pillar of the church.  For me, I staggered to the
door, with a white, wet face, breathless, with all the weight of all
the dome upon my head.  As I was crossing the threshold, a hand
seized mine, a woman's hand.  I had never felt before a woman's hand
in mine.  It was cold as the skin of a serpent, yet it burned me like
a brand.  "Miserable man, what hast thou done?" she whispered, and
was lost in the crowd.

The old bishop paused, and gazed severely at me, who was a piteous
spectacle, now red, now pale, giddy, and faint.  One of my fellows
had compassion on me, and led me home.  I could not have found the
way alone.  At the corner of a street, while the young priest's head
was turned, a black page, strangely clad, came up to me, and gave me,
as he passed, a little leathern case, with corners of wrought gold,
signing me to hide it.  I thrust it into my sleeve, and there kept it
till I was alone in my cell.  Then I opened the clasp; there were but
these words written: "Clarimonde, at the Palazzo Concini."  So little
of a worldling was I, that I had never heard of Clarimonde, despite
her fame, nay, nor knew where the Palazzo Concini might be.  I made a
myriad guesses, each wilder than the other; but, truth to tell, so I
did but see her again, I recked little whether Clarimonde were a
noble lady, or no better than one of the wicked.

This love, thus born in an hour, had struck root too deep for me to
dream of casting it from my heart.  This woman had made me utterly
her own, a glance had been enough to change me, her will had passed
upon me; I lived not for myself, but in her and for her.

Many mad things did I, kissing my hand where hers had touched it,
repeating her name for hours: Clarimonde, Clarimonde!  I had but to
close my eyes, and I saw her as distinctly as if she had been
present.  Then I murmured to myself the words that beneath the church
porch she had spoken: "Miserable man, what hast thou done?"  I felt
all the horror of that strait wherein I was, and the dead and
terrible aspect of the life that I had chosen was now revealed.  To
be a priest!  Never to love, to know youth nor sex, to turn from
beauty, to close the eyes, to crawl in the chill shade of a cloister
or a church; to see none but deathly men, to watch by the nameless
corpses of folk unknown, to wear a cassock like my own mourning for
myself, my own raiment for my coffin's pall.

Then life arose in me like a lake in flood, my blood coursed in my
veins, my youth burst forth in a moment; like the aloe, which flowers
but once in a hundred years, and breaks into blossom with a sound of
thunder!

How was I again to have sight of Clarimonde?  I had no excuse for
leaving the seminary, for I knew nobody in town, and indeed was only
waiting till I should be appointed to my parish.  I tried to remove
the bars of the window, but to descend without a ladder was
impossible.  Then, again, I could only escape by night, when I should
be lost in the labyrinth of streets.  These difficulties, which would
have been nothing to others, were enormous to a poor priest like me,
now first fallen in love, without experience, or money, or knowledge
of the world.

Ah, had I not been a priest I might have seen her every day, I might
have been her lover, her husband, I said to myself in the blindness
of my heart.  In place of being swathed in a cassock I might have
worn silk and velvet, chains of gold, a sword and feather like all
the fair young knights.  My locks would not be tonsured, but would
fall in perfumed curls about my neck.  But one hour spent before an
altar, and some gabbled words, had cut me off from the company of the
living.  With my own hand I had sealed the stone upon my tomb, and
turned the key in the lock of my prison!

I walked to the window.  The sky was heavenly blue, the trees had
clothed them in the raiment of spring, all nature smiled with mockery
in her smile.  The square was full of people coming and going: young
exquisites, young beauties, two by two, were walking in the direction
of the gardens.  Workmen sang drinking songs as they passed; on all
sides were a life, a movement, a gaiety that did but increase my
sorrow and my solitude.  A young mother, on the steps of the gate,
was playing with her child, kissing its little rosy mouth, with a
thousand of the caresses, the childlike and the divine caresses that
are the secret of mothers.  Hard by the father, with folded arms
above a happy heart, smiled sweetly as he watched them.  I could not
endure the sight.  I shut the window, and threw myself on the bed in
a horrible jealousy and hatred, so that I gnawed my fingers and my
coverlet like a starved wild beast.

How many days I lay thus I know not, but at last, as I turned in a
spasm of rage, I saw the Abbé Sérapion curiously considering me.  I
bowed my head in shame, and hid my face with my hands.  "Romuald, my
friend," said he, "some strange thing hath befallen thee.  Satan hath
desired to have thee, that he may sift thee like wheat; he goeth
about thee to devour thee like a raging lion.  Beware and make
thyself a breastplate of prayer, a shield of the mortifying of the
flesh.  Fight, and thou shalt overcome.  Be not afraid with any
discouragement, for the firmest hearts and the most surely guarded
have known hours like these.  Pray, fast, meditate, and the evil
spirit will pass away from thee."

Then Sérapion told me that the priest of C---- was dead, that the
bishop had appointed me to this charge, and that I must be ready by
the morrow.  I nodded assent, and the Abbé departed.  I opened my
missal and strove to read in it, but the lines waved confusedly, and
the volume slipped unheeded from my hands.

Next day Sérapion came for me; two mules were waiting for us at the
gate with our slender baggage, and we mounted as well as we might.
As we traversed the streets I looked for Clarimonde, in each balcony,
at every window; but it was too early, and the city was yet asleep.
When we had passed the gates, and were climbing the height, I turned
back for a last glance at the place that was the home of Clarimonde.
The shadow of a cloud lay on the city, the red roofs and the blue
were mingled in a mist, whence rose here and there white puffs of
smoke.  By some strange optical effect, one house stood up, golden in
a ray of light, far above the roofs that were mingled in the mist.  A
league away though it was, it seemed quite close to us--all was plain
to see, turrets, balconies, parapets, the very weathercocks.

"What is that palace we see yonder in the sunlight?" said I to
Sérapion.

He shaded his eyes with his hand, looked, and answered:

"That is the old palace which Prince Concini has given to Clarimonde
the harlot.  Therein dreadful things are done."

Even at that moment, whether it were real or a vision I know not now,
methought I saw a white and slender shape come across the terrace,
glance, and disappear.  It was Clarimonde!

Ah, did she know how in that hour, at the height of the rugged way
which led me from her, even at the crest of the path I should never
tread again, I was watching her, eager and restless, watching the
palace where she dwelt, and which a freak of light and shadow seemed
to bring near me, as if inviting me to enter and be lord of all?
Doubtless she knew it, so closely bound was her heart to mine; and
this it was which had urged her, in the raiment of the night, to
climb the palace terrace in the frosty dews of dawn.

The shadow slipped over the palace, and, anon, there was but a
motionless sea of roofs, marked merely by a billowy undulation of
forms.  Sérapion pricked on his mule, mine also quickened, and a
winding of the road hid from me forever the city of S----, where I
was to return no more.  At the end of three days' journey through
melancholy fields, we saw the weathercock of my parish church peeping
above the trees.  Some winding lanes, bordered by cottages and
gardens, brought us to the building, which was of no great splendor.
A porch with a few moldings, and two or three pillars rudely carved
in sandstone, a tiled roof with counter-forts of the same stone as
the pillars--that was all.  To the left was the graveyard, deep in
tall grasses, with an iron cross in the centre.  The priest's house
was to the right, in the shadow of the church.  Simplicity could not
be more simple, nor cleanliness less lovely.  Some chickens were
pecking at a few grains of oats on the ground as we entered.  The
sight of a priest's frock seemed too familiar to alarm them, and they
scarcely moved to let us pass.  Then we heard a hoarse and wheezy
bark, and an old dog ran up to greet us.  He was the dog of the late
priest--dim-eyed, gray, with every sign of a dog's extreme old age.
I patted him gently, and he walked along by my side with an air of
inexpressible satisfaction.  An elderly woman, my predecessor's
housekeeper, came in her turn to greet us; and when she learned that
I meant to keep her in my service, to keep the dog and the chickens,
with all the furniture that her master had left her at his
death--above all, when the Abbé Sérapion paid what she asked on the
spot--her joy knew no bounds.

When I had been duly installed, Sérapion returned to the college, and
I was left alone.  Unsupported, uncomforted as I was, the thought of
Clarimonde again beset me, nor could I drive her memory away for all
my efforts.  One evening, as I walked among the box-lined paths of my
little garden, I fancied that I saw among the trees the form of a
woman, who followed all my movements, and whose green eyes glistened
through the leaves.  Green as the sea shone her eyes, but it was no
more than a vision, for when I crossed to the other side of the alley
nothing did I find but the print of a little foot on the sand--a foot
like the foot of a child.  Now the garden was girt with high walls,
and, for all my search, I could find no living thing within them.  I
have never been able to explain this incident, which, after all, was
nothing to the strange adventures that were to follow.

Thus did I live for a whole year, fulfilling every duty of the
priesthood--preaching, praying, fasting, visiting the sick, denying
myself necessaries that I might give to the poor.  But within me all
was dry and barren--the fountains of grace were sealed.  I knew not
the happiness which goes with the consciousness of a holy mission
fulfilled.  My heart was otherwhere; the words of Clarimonde dwelt on
my lips like the ballad burden a man repeats against his will.  Oh,
my brother, consider this!  For the lifting up of mine eyes to behold
a woman have I been harried these many years, and my life hath been
troubled forever.

I shall not hold you longer with the story of these defeats and these
victories and the fresh defeats of my soul; let me come to the
beginning of the new life.

One night there was a violent knocking at my gate.  The old
housekeeper went to open it, and the appearance of a man richly clad
in an outlandish fashion, tawny of hue, armed with a long dagger,
stood before her in the light of her lantern.  She was terrified, but
he soothed her, saying that he needs must see me instantly concerning
a matter of my ministry.  Barbara brought him upstairs to the room
where I was about going to bed.  There the man told me that his
mistress, a lady of high degree, was on the point of death, and
desired to see a priest.  I answered that I was ready to follow him,
and taking with me such matters as are needful for extreme unction, I
went down hastily.  At the door were two horses, black as night,
their breath rising in white clouds of vapor.  The man held my
stirrup while I mounted; then he laid one hand on the pommel and
vaulted on the other horse.  Gripping his beast with his knees, he
gave him his head, and we started with the speed of an arrow, my
horse keeping pace with his own.  We seemed in running to devour the
way; the earth flitted gray beneath us, the black trees fled in the
darkness like an army in rout.  A forest we crossed, so gloomy and so
frozen cold that I felt in all my veins a shudder of superstitious
dread.  The sparks struck from the flints by our coursers' feet
followed after us like a trail of fire, and whoever saw us must have
deemed us two ghosts riding the nightmare.  Will-o'-the-wisps
glittered across our path, the night birds clamored in the forest
deeps, and now and again shone out the burning eyes of wild-cats.

The manes of the horses tossed more wildly on the wind, the sweat ran
down their sides, their breath came thick and loud.  But whenever
they slackened, the groom called on them with a cry like nothing that
ever came from a human throat, and again they ran their furious
course.  At last the tempest of their flight reached its goal;
suddenly there stood before us a great dark mass, with shining points
of flame.  Our horses' hoofs clattered louder on a drawbridge, and we
thundered through the dark depths of a vaulted entrance which gaped
between two monstrous towers.  Within the castle all was
confusion--servants with burning torches ran hither and thither
through the courts; on the staircases lights rose and fell.  I beheld
a medley of vast buildings, columns, arches, parapet and balcony--a
bewildering world of royal or of fairy palaces.  The negro page who
had given me the tablets of Clarimonde, and whom I recognized at a
glance, helped me to alight.  A seneschal in black velvet, with a
golden chain about his neck, and an ivory wand in his hand, came
forward to meet me, great tears rolling down his cheeks to his snowy
beard.

"Too late," he said; "too late, sir priest!  But if thou hast not
come in time to save the soul, watch, I pray thee, with the unhappy
body of the dead."

He took me by the arm; he led me to the hall, where the corpse was
lying, and I wept as bitterly as he, deeming that the dead was
Clarimonde, the well and wildly loved.  There stood a prie-dieu by
the bed; a blue flame flickering from a cup of bronze cast all about
the chamber a doubtful light, and here and there set the shadows
fluttering.  In a chiseled vase on the table was one white rose
faded, a single petal clinging to the stem; the rest had fallen like
fragrant tears and lay beside the vase.  A broken mask, a fan,
masquerading gear of every kind were huddled on the chairs, and
showed that death had come, unlooked for and unheralded, to that
splendid house.  Not daring to cast mine eyes upon the bed, I
kneeled, and fervently began to repeat the Psalms, thanking God that
between this woman and me He had set the tomb, so that now her name
might come like a thing enskied and sainted in my prayers.

By degrees this ardor slackened, and I fell a-dreaming.  This
chamber, after all, had none of the air of a chamber of death.  In
place of the fetid, corpse-laden atmosphere that I was wont to
breathe in these vigils, there floated gently through the warmth a
vapor of Orient essences, a perfume of women and of love.  The pale
glimmer of the lamp seemed rather the twilight of pleasure than the
yellow burning of the taper that watches by the dead.  I began to
think of the rare hazard that brought me to Clarimonde in the moment
when I had lost her forever, and a sigh came from my breast.  Then
meseemed that one answered with a sigh behind me, and I turned
unconsciously.  'Twas but an echo, but, as I turned, mine eyes fell
on that which they had shunned--the bed where Clarimonde lay in
state.  The flowered and crimson curtains, bound up with loops of
gold, left the dead woman plain to view, lying at her length, with
hands folded on her breast.  She was covered with a linen veil, very
white and glistening, the more by reason of the dark purple hangings,
and so fine was the shroud that her fair body shone through it, with
those beautiful soft waving lines, as of the swan's neck, that not
even death could harden.  Fair she was as a statue of alabaster
carved by some skilled man for the tomb of a queen; fair as a young
maid asleep beneath new-fallen snow.

I could endure no longer.  The air as of a bower of love, the scent
of the faded rose intoxicated me, and I strode through the chamber,
stopping at each turn to gaze at the beautiful dead beneath the
transparent shroud.  Strange thoughts haunted my brain.  I fancied
that she was not really gone, that it was but a device to draw me
within her castle gates, and to tell me all her love.

Nay, one moment methought I saw her foot stir beneath its white
swathings, and break the stiff lines of the shroud.

"Is she really Clarimonde?" I asked myself presently.  "What proof
have I?  The black page may have entered the household of some other
lady.  Mad must I be thus to disquiet myself."

But the beating of my own heart answered me, "It is she!  It is she!"

I drew near the bed, and looked with fresh attention at that which
thus perplexed me.  Shall I confess it?  The perfection of her
beauty, though shadowed and sanctified by death, troubled my heart,
and that long rest of hers was wondrous like a living woman's sleep.
I forgot that I had come there to watch by a corpse, and I dreamed
that I was a young bridegroom entering the chamber of the veiled,
half-hidden bride.  Broken with sorrow, wild with joy, shuddering
with dread and desire, I stooped toward the dead and raised a corner
of the sheet.  Gently I raised it, holding my breath as though I
feared to waken her.  My blood coursed so vehemently that I heard it
rushing and surging through the veins of my temples.  My brow was
dank with drops of sweat, as if I had lifted no film of linen, but a
weighty gravestone of marble.

There lay Clarimonde, even as I had seen her on the day of mine
ordination; even so delightful was she, and death in Clarimonde
seemed but a wilful charm.  The pallor of her cheeks, her dead lips
fading rose, her long downcast eyelids, with their brown lashes,
breaking the marble of her cheek, all gave her an air of melancholy,
and of purity, of pensive patience that had an inexpressible winning
magic.  Her long loose hair, the small blue flowers yet scattered
through it, pillowed her head, and veiled the splendor of her
shoulders.  Her fair hands, clear and pure as the consecrated wafer,
were crossed in an attitude of holy rest and silent prayer, that
suffered not the exquisite roundness and ivory polish of her pearled
arms to prove, even in death, too triumphant a lure of men.

Long did I wait and watch her silently, and still the more I gazed,
the less I could deem that life had left forever her beautiful body.
I knew not if it were an illusion, or a reflection from the lamp, but
it was as if the blood began to flow again beneath that dead white of
her flesh, and yet she lay eternally, immovably still.  I touched her
arm; it was cold, but no colder than her hand had been on the day
when it met mine beneath the church porch.  I fell into my old
attitude, stooping my face above her face, while down upon her rained
the warm dew of my tears.  Oh, bitterness of impotence and of
despair; oh, wild agony of that death watch!

The night crept on, and as I felt that the eternal separation drew
near, I could not deny myself the sad last delight of one kiss on the
dead lips that held all my love.

Oh, miracle!  A light breath mingled with my breath, and the mouth of
Clarimonde answered to the touch of mine!  Her eyes opened, and
softly shone.  She sighed, she uncrossed her arms, and, folding them
about my neck in a ravished ecstasy:

"Ah, Romuald, it is thou!" she said in a voice as sweet and
languishing as the last tremblings of a lyre.  "Ah, Romuald, what
makest thou here?  So long have I waited for thee that I am dead.
Yet now we are betrothed, now I may see thee, and visit thee.
Farewell, Romuald, farewell!  I love thee.  It is all that I had to
tell thee, and I give thee again that life which thou gavest me with
thy kiss.  Soon shall we meet again."

Her head sank down, but still her arms clung to me as if they would
hold me forever.  A wild gust of wind burst open the window and broke
into the room.  The last leaf of the white rose fluttered like a
bird's wing on the stem, and then fell and flew through the open
casement, bearing with it the soul of Clarimonde.

The lamp went out, and I fell fainting on the breast of the beautiful
corpse.

When I came to myself I was lying on my own bed in the little chamber
of the priest's house; my hand had slipped from beneath the coverlet,
the old dog was licking it.  Barbara hobbled and trembled about the
room, opening and shutting drawers, and shaking powders into glasses.
The old woman gave a cry of delight when she saw me open my eyes.
The dog yelped and wagged his tail, but I was too weak to utter a
word or make the slightest movement.  Later, I learned that for three
days I had lain thus, with no sign of life but a scarce perceptible
breathing.  These three days do not count in my life; I know not
where my spirit went wandering all that time, whereof I keep not the
slightest memory.  Barbara told me that the same bronzed man who had
come for me at night brought me back in a closed litter next morning,
and instantly went his way.  So soon as I could recall my thoughts, I
reviewed each incident of that fatal night.  At first I deemed that I
had been duped by art magic, but presently actual, palpable
circumstances destroyed that belief.  I could not suppose that I had
been dreaming, for Barbara, no less than myself, had seen the man
with the two coal-black steeds, and she described them accurately.
Yet no one knew of any castle in the neighborhood at all like that in
which I had found Clarimonde again.

One morning Sérapion entered my room; he had come with all haste in
answer to Barbara's message about my illness.  Though this declared
his affection for me, none the more did his visit give me pleasure.
There was something inquisitive and piercing to my mind in the very
glance of Sérapion, and I felt like a criminal in his presence.  He
it was who first discovered my secret disquiet, and I bore him a
grudge for being so clear-sighted.

While he was asking about my health, in accents of honeyed hypocrisy,
his eyes, as yellow as a lion's, were sounding the depths of my soul.
Presently--"The famous harlot Clarimonde is dead," says he, in a
piercing tone, "dead at the close of an eight days' revel.  It was a
feast of Belshazzar or of Cleopatra.  Good God, what an age is ours!
The guests were served by dusky slaves who spoke no tongue known
among men, and who seemed like spirits from the pit.  The livery of
the least of them might have beseemed an emperor on a coronation day.
Wild tales are told of this same Clarimonde, and all her loves have
perished miserably or by violence.  They say she was a ghost, a
female vampire, but I believe she was the devil himself."

He paused, watching me, who could not master a sudden movement at the
name of Clarimonde.

"Satan's claw is long," said Sérapion, with a stern glance, "and
tombs ere now have given up their dead.  Threefold should be the seal
upon the grave of Clarimonde, for this is not, men say, the first
time she hath died.  God be with thee, Romuald!"

So speaking, Sérapion departed with slow steps, and I saw him no more
as at that time.

Time passed and I was well again.  Nay, I deemed that the fears of
Sérapion and my own terrors were too great, till, one night, I
dreamed a dream.

Scarce had I tasted the first drops of the cup of sleep when I heard
the curtains of my bed open and the rings ring.  I raised myself
suddenly on my arm and saw the shadow of a woman standing by me.

Straightway I knew her for Clarimonde.

She held in her hand a little lamp, such as are placed in tombs, and
the light touched her slim fingers to a rosy hue, that faded away in
the milk-white of her arms.  She was clad with naught on but the
linen shroud that veiled her when she lay in state; the folds were
clasped about her breast, as it were in pudency, by a hand all too
small.  So white she was that her shroud and her body were blended in
the pallid glow of the lamp.

Swathed thus in the fine tissue that betrayed every line of her
figure, she seemed a marble image of some lady at the bath rather
than a living woman.  Dead or living, statue or woman, spirit or
flesh, her beauty was the same; only the glitter of her dull
sea-green eyes was dulled--only the mouth, so red of old, wore but a
tender tint of rose, like the white rose of her cheeks.  The little
blue flowers that I had seen in her hair were sere now, and all but
bloomless; yet so winning was she, so winning that, despite the
strangeness of the adventure and her inexplicable invasion of my
chamber, I was not afraid for one moment.

She placed the lamp on the table, and sat down by my bed-foot.  Then,
in those soft and silver accents which I never heard from any lips
but hers--"Long have I made thee wait for me," she said, "and thou
must have deemed that I had forgotten thee quite.  But lo!  I come
from far, very far--even from that land whence no traveler has
returned.  There is no sunlight nor moon in the country whence I
wander, only shadow and space.  There the foot finds no rest, nor the
wandering wing any way; yet here am I; behold me, for Love can
conquer Death.  Ah, what sad faces and terrible eyes have I seen in
my voyaging, and in what labor hath my soul been to find my body and
to make her home therein again!  How hard to lift was the stone that
they had laid on me for a covering!  Lo, my hands are sorely wounded
in that toil!  Kiss them, my love, and heal them."  And she laid her
chill palms, on my mouth, that I kissed many times, she smiling on me
with an inexpressible sweetness of delight.

To my shame be it spoken, I had wholly forgotten the counsels of the
Abbé Sérapion, and the sacred character of my ministry.  I fell
unresisting at the first attack.  Nay, I did not even try to bid the
tempter avaunt, but succumbed without a struggle before the sweet
freshness of Clarimonde's fair body.  Poor child! for all that is
come and gone, I can scarce believe that she was indeed a devil;
surely there was naught of the devil in her aspect.  Never hath Satan
better concealed his claws and his horns!

She was crouching on the side of my bed, her heels drawn up beneath
her in an attitude of careless and provoking grace.  Once and again
she would pass her little hands among my locks, and curl them, as if
to try what style best suited my face.  It is worth noting that I
felt no astonishment at an adventure so marvelous--nay, as in a dream
the strangest events fail to surprise us, even so the whole encounter
seemed to me perfectly natural.

"I loved thee long before I saw thee, Romuald, my love, and I sought
for thee everywhere.  Thou wert my dream, and I beheld thee in the
church at that fatal hour.  'It is he,' I whispered to myself, and
cast on thee a glance fulfilled of all the love wherewith I had
loved, and did love, and shall love thee; a glance that would have
ruined the soul of a cardinal or brought a king with all his court to
my feet.

"But thou wert not moved, and before my love thou didst place the
love of God.

"Ah, 'tis of God that I am jealous--God whom thou hast loved and
lovest more than me.

"Miserable woman that I am!  Never shall I have all thy heart for
myself alone--for me, whom thou didst awaken with one kiss; for me,
Clarimonde, the dead; for me, who for thy sake have broken the
portals of the grave, and am come to offer to thee a life that hath
been taken up again for this one end to make thee happy."

So she spoke; and every word was broken in on by maddening caresses,
till my brain swam, and I feared not to console her by this awful
blasphemy, namely--_That my love of her passed my love of God!_

Then the fire of her eyes was rekindled, and they blazed as it had
been the chrysoprase stone.

"Verily thou lovest me with a love like thy love of God," she cried,
making her fair arms a girdle for my body.  "Then thou shalt come
with me, and whithersoever I go wilt thou follow.  Thou wilt leave
thine ugly black robes, thou wilt be of all knights the proudest and
the most envied.  The acknowledged lover of Clarimonde shalt thou be,
of her who refused a Pope!  Ah, happy life, oh, golden days that
shall be ours!  When do we mount and ride, _mon gentilhomme_?"

"To-morrow," I cried in my madness.

"To-morrow," she answered, "I shall have time to change this robe of
mine that is somewhat scant, nor fit for voyaging.  Also must I speak
with my retainers, that think me dead in good earnest, and lament me,
as well they may.  Money, carriages, change of raiment, all shall be
ready for thee; at this hour to-morrow will I seek thee.  Good-by,
sweetheart."

She touched my brow with her lips, the lamp faded into darkness, the
curtains closed, a sleep like lead came down on me, sleep without a
dream.

I wakened late, troubled by the memory of my dream, which at length I
made myself believe was but a vision of the night.  Yet it was not
without dread that I sought rest again, praying Heaven to guard the
purity of my slumber.

Anon I fell again into a deep sleep, and my dream began again.  The
curtains opened, and there stood Clarimonde, not pale in her pale
shroud, nor with the violets of death upon her cheek; but gay,
bright, splendid, in a traveling robe of green velvet with trappings
of gold, and kilted up on one side to show a satin undercoat.  Her
fair, curled locks fell in great masses from under a large black
beaver hat, with strange white plumes; in her hand she held a little
riding-whip, topped with a golden whistle.  With this she touched me
gently, saying:

"Awake, fair sleeper!  Is it thus you prepare for your voyage?  I had
thought to find you alert.  Rise, quickly; we have no time to lose!"

I leaped out of bed.

"Come, dress, and let us be gone," she said, showing me a packet she
had brought.  "Our horses are fretting and champing at the gate.  We
should be ten leagues from here."

I arrayed myself in haste, while she instructed me, handed me the
various articles of a knight's attire, and laughed at my clumsiness.
She dressed my hair, and when all was done, gave me a little Venice
pocket-mirror in a silver frame, crying:

"What think you of yourself now?  Will you take me for your valet de
chambre?"

I did not know my own face in the glass, and was no more like myself
than a statue is like the uncut stone.  I was beautiful, and I was
vain of the change.  The gold embroidered gallant attire made me
another man, and I marveled at the magic of a few ells of cloth,
fashioned to certain device.  The character of my clothes became my
own, and in ten minutes I was sufficiently conceited.

Clarimonde watched me with a kind of maternal fondness as I walked up
and down the room, proving my new raiment as it were; then:

"Come," she cried; "enough of this child's play!  Up and away, my
Romuald!  We have far to go; we shall never arrive."

She took my hand and led me forth.  The gates opened at her touch;
the dog did not waken as we passed.

At the gate we found the groom with three horses like those he had
led before: Tennets of Spain, the children of the wind.  Swift as the
wind they sped; and the moon that had risen to light us at our going,
spun down the sky behind us like a wheel broken loose from the axle;
we seemed to see her on our right, leaping from tree to tree as she
strove to follow our course.  Presently we came on a plain, where a
carriage with four horses waited for us; and the postilion drove them
to a mad gallop.  My arm was round the waist of Clarimonde, her head
lay on my shoulder, her breast touched my arm.  Never had I known
such delight.  All that I had been was forgotten, like the months
before birth, so great was the power of the devil over my heart.

From that date mine became a double life; within me were two men that
knew each other not--the priest who dreamed that by night he was a
noble, the noble who dreamed that by night he was a priest.  I could
not divide dreams from waking, nor tell where truth ended and
illusion began.  Two spirals, blended but touching not, might be a
parable of my confused existence.  Yet, strange as it was, I believe
I never was insane.  The experience of either life dwells distinct
and separate in my memory.  Only there was this inexplicable
fact--the feeling of one personality existed in both these two
different men.  Of this I have never found an explanation, whether I
was for the moment the curé of the village of ----, or whether I was
Signor Romualdo, the avowed lover of Clarimonde.

Certain it is that I was, or believed myself to be, in Venice--in a
great palace on the Grand Canal, full of frescoes, statues, and rich
in two Titians of his best period--a palace fit for a king.  We had
each our gondola, our liveried men, our music, our poet, for
Clarimonde loved life in the great style, and in her nature was a
touch of Cleopatra.  Custom could not stale her infinite variety; to
love her was to love a score of mistresses, and you were faithless to
her with herself, so strangely she could wear the beauty of any woman
that caught your fancy.  She returned my love a hundred-fold.  She
scorned the gifts of young patricians and of the elders of the
Council of Ten.  She refused the hand of a Foscari.  Gold enough she
had, she desired only love; a young fresh love herself had wakened--a
love that found in her its first mistress and its last.

As for me, in the midst of a life of the wildest pleasure, I should
have been happy but for the nightly horror of the dream wherein I was
a curé, fasting and mortifying myself in penance for the sins of the
day.  Custom made my life with her familiar, and it was rarely that I
remembered (and that never with fear) the words of the Abbé Sérapion.

For some time Clarimonde had not been herself, her health failing,
her complexion growing paler day by day.  The physicians were of no
avail, and she grew cold and dead as on the wondrous night in the
nameless castle.  Sadly she smiled on my distress, with the fatal
smile of those who know that their death is near.  One morning I sat
on her bed, breakfasting at a small table hard by; as it chanced in
cutting a fruit I gashed my finger deeply; the blood came in purple
streams; and spurted up on Clarimonde.  Her eyes brightened, her face
took on a savage joy and greed such as I had never seen.  She leaped
from the bed like a cat, seized my wounded hand, and sucked the blood
with unspeakable pleasure, slowly, gently like a connoisseur tasting
some rare wine.

In her half-closed eyes the round pupil grew long in shape.  Again
and again she stopped to kiss my hand, and then pressed her lips once
more on the wound, to squeeze out the red drops.

When she saw that the blood was stanched, she rose; her eyes
brilliant and humid, her face as rosy as a dawn of May, her hand warm
and moist; in short, more lovely than of old, and in perfect health.

"I shall not die!  I shall not die!" she exclaimed, wild with
delight, as she embraced me.  "I shall yet love thee long; for my
life is in thine, and all that is in me comes from thee.  Some drops
of thy rich and noble blood, more precious than all the elixirs in
the world, have given me back my life."

This event, and the strange doubts it inspired, haunted me long.
When the night and sleep brought me back to my priest's home, I
beheld Sérapion, more anxious than ever, more careful and troubled.
He gazed on me steadfastly, and said:

"Not content with losing thy soul, thou art also desirous of ruining
thy body.  Unhappy young man, in what a net hast thou fallen!"

The tone of his voice struck cold on me; but a thousand new cares
made me forget his words.  Yet, one night I saw in a mirror that
Clarimonde was pouring a powder into the spiced wine-cup she mingled
after supper.  I took the cup, pretending to drink, but really
casting the potion away beneath the table.  Then I went to bed,
intent on watching and seeing what should come to pass.  Nor did I
wait long.  Clarimonde entered, cast off her night attire, and lay
down by my side.  When she was assured that I slept, she uncovered my
arm, drew a golden pin from her hair, and then fell a-murmuring thus:

"One drop, one little crimson drop, one ruby on the tip of my needle!
Since thou lovest me yet, I must not die.  Sleep, my god, my child,
my all; I shall not harm thee; of thy life I will but take what is
needful for mine.  Alas! poor love; alas! fair purple blood that I
must drink!  Ah, fair arm, so round, so white, never will I dare to
prick that pretty violet vein."

So speaking, she wept, and the tears fell hot on my arm.  At length
she came to a resolve, pricked me with the needle, and sucked the
blood that flowed.  But a few drops did she taste, for fear of
exhausting me, then she anointed the tiny wound, and fastened a
little bandage about my arm.

I could no longer doubt it, Sérapion had spoken sooth.  Yet must I
needs love Clarimonde, and would willingly have given her all the
blood in my veins that then were rich enough.  Nor was I afraid, the
woman in her was more than surety for the vampire.  I could have
pricked my own arm and said, "Drink; let my love become part of thy
being with my blood."  I never spoke a word of the narcotic that she
had poured out for me, never a word of the needle; we lived together
in perfect union of hearts.

It was my scruples as a priest that disquieted me.  How could I touch
the Host with hands polluted in such debauches, real or dreamed of?
At night I struggled against sleep, holding mine eyelids open,
standing erect against walls; but mine eyes were filled with the sand
of sleep, and the wave carried me even where it would, down to the
siren shores.

Sérapion reproached me often.  One day he came and said: "To drive
away the devil that possesses thee there is but one art; great ills
demand harsh remedies.  I know where Clarimonde is buried; we must
unearth her, and the sight of the worms and the dust of death will
make thee thyself again."

So weary was I of my double life, so eager to know whether the priest
or the noble was the true man, which the dream, that I accepted his
plan, being determined to slay one or the other of the beings that
dwelt within me; ay, or to slay them both, for such a life as mine
could not endure.

The Abbé Sérapion took a lantern, a pick, a crowbar, and at midnight
we set out for the graveyard.  After throwing the light of the
lantern on several tombs, we reached a stone half-hidden by tall
weeds, and covered with ivy, moss, and lichen.  Thereon we read these
words graven:

  ICI GIT CLARIMONDE
  QUI PUT DE SON VIVANTE
  LA PLUS BELLE DU MONDE


"'Tis here!" said Sérapion, who, laying down his lantern, thrust the
crowbar in a cleft of the stone, and began to raise it.  Slowly it
gave place, and he set to work with the pick-ax.  For me, I watched
him dark and silent as the night, while his face, when he raised it,
ran with sweat, and his laboring breath came like the death-rattle in
his throat.  Methought the deed was a sacrilege, and I would fain
have seen the lightning leap from the cloud, and strike Sérapion to
ashes.

The owls of the graveyard, attracted by the light, flocked and
flapped about the lantern with their wings; their hooting sounded
wofully; the foxes barked their answer far away; a thousand evil
sounds broke from the stillness.

At length the pick of Sérapion smote the coffin-lid; the four planks
answered sullenly, as the void of nothingness replied to the touch.
Sérapion raised the coffin-lid, and there I saw Clarimonde, pale as
marble, her hands joined, the long white shroud flowing unbroken to
her feet.

On her pale mouth shone one rosy drop, and Sérapion, breaking forth
in fury, cried:

"Ah, there thou liest, devil, harlot, vampire, thou that drainest the
blood of men!"

With this he sprinkled holy water over my lady, whose fair body
straightway crumbled into earth, a dreadful mingling of dust and the
ashes of bones half-burned.

"There lies thy leman, Sir Romuald," he said; "go now and dally at
the Lido with thy beauty."

I bowed my head; within me all was ruin.  Back to my poor priest's
house I went; and Romuald, the lover of Clarimonde, said farewell to
the priest, with whom so long and so strangely he had companioned.

But, next night, I saw Clarimonde.

"Wretched man that thou art," she cried, as of old under the church
porch, "what hast thou done?  Why hast thou hearkened to that foolish
priest?  Wert thou not happy, or what ill had I done thee that thou
must violate my tomb, and lay bare the wretchedness of the grave?
Henceforth is the link between our souls and bodies broken.
Farewell!  Thou shalt desire me."

Then she fled away into air, like smoke, and I saw her no more.

Alas! it was truth she spoke; more than once have I sorrowed for
her--nay, I long for her still.  Dearly purchased hath my salvation
been, and the love of God hath not been too much to replace the love
of her.

Behold, brother, all the story of my youth.

Let not thine eyes look ever upon a woman; walk always with glance
downcast; for, be ye chaste and be ye cold as ye may, one minute may
damn you to all eternity.


(_Translation by Andrew Lang._)




THE RED ROOM

BY H. G. WELLS

_Herbert George Wells (born 1866), on his graduation in 1888 from the
Royal College of Science, took up the serious side of science as a
career, publishing in 1892-93 a textbook on biology.  An editorial
connection (with "The Saturday Review" in 1894-96) turned his
attention to the literary possibilities of his favorite study, and in
1895 he began a series of novels in which by an extraordinary
prescience of imagination he developed the suggestions of modern
science into marvelous embodiments of newly discovered principles and
powers which are shown to result in profound changes in both the
social and individual character of man._



THE RED ROOM

By H. G. WELLS

"I can assure you," said I, "that it will take a very tangible ghost
to frighten me."  And I stood up before the fire with my glass in my
hand.

"It is your own choosing," said the man with the withered arm, and
glanced at me askance.

"Eight-and-twenty years," said I, "I have lived, and never a ghost
have I seen as yet."

The old woman sat staring hard into the fire, her pale eyes wide
open.  "Ay," she broke in, "and eight-and-twenty years you have
lived, and never seen the likes of this house, I reckon.  There's a
many things to see, when one's still but eight-and-twenty."  She
swayed her head slowly from side to side.  "A many things to see and
sorrow for."

I half suspected these old people were trying to enhance the spectral
terrors of their house by this droning insistence.  I put down my
empty glass on the table, and, looking about the room, caught a
glimpse of myself, abbreviated and broadened to an impossible
sturdiness, in the queer old mirror beside the china cupboard.
"Well," I said, "if I see anything to-night, I shall be so much the
wiser.  For I come to the business with an open mind."

"It's your own choosing," said the man with the withered arm once
more.

I heard the faint sound of a stick and a shambling step on the flags
in the passage outside.  The door creaked on its hinges as a second
old man entered, more bent, more wrinkled, more aged even than the
first.  He supported himself by the help of a crutch, his eyes were
covered by a shade, and his lower lip, half averted, hung pale and
pink from his decaying yellow teeth.  He made straight for an
armchair on the opposite side of the table, sat down clumsily, and
began to cough.  The man with the withered hand gave the new-comer a
short glance of positive dislike; the old woman took no notice of his
arrival, but remained with her eyes fixed steadily on the fire.

"I said--it's your own choosing," said the man with the withered
hand, when the coughing had ceased for a while.

"It's my own choosing," I answered.

The man with the shade became aware of my presence for the first
time, and threw his head back for a moment, and sidewise, to see me.
I caught a momentary glimpse of his eyes, small and bright and
inflamed.  Then he began to cough and splutter again.

"Why don't you drink?" said the man with the withered arm, pushing
the beer toward him.  The man with the shade poured out a glassful
with a shaking hand, that splashed half as much again on the deal
table.  A monstrous shadow of him crouched upon the wall, and mocked
his action as he poured and drank.  I must confess I had scarcely
expected these grotesque custodians.  There is, to my mind, something
inhuman in senility, something crouching and atavistic; the human
qualities seem to drop from old people insensibly day by day.  The
three of them made me feel uncomfortable with their gaunt silences,
their bent carriage, their evident unfriendliness to me and to one
another.  And that night, perhaps, I was in the mood for
uncomfortable impressions.  I resolved to get away from their vague
foreshadowings of the evil things upstairs.

"If," said I, "you will show me to this haunted room of yours, I will
make myself comfortable there."

The old man with the cough jerked his head back so suddenly that it
startled me, and shot another glance of his red eyes at me from out
of the darkness under the shade, but no one answered me.  I waited a
minute, glancing from one to the other.  The old woman stared like a
dead body, glaring into the fire with lack-lustre eyes.

"If," I said, a little louder, "if you will show me to this haunted
room of yours, I will relieve you from the task of entertaining me."

"There's a candle on the slab outside the door," said the man with
the withered hand, looking at my feet as he addressed me.  "But if
you go to the Red Room to-night--"

"This night of all nights!" said the old woman, softly.

"--You go alone."

"Very well," I answered, shortly, "and which way do I go?"

"You go along the passage for a bit," said he, nodding his head on
his shoulder at the door, "until you come to a spiral staircase; and
on the second landing is a door covered with green baize.  Go through
that, and down the long corridor to the end, and the Red Room is on
your left up the steps."

"Have I got that right?" I said, and repeated his directions.

He corrected me in one particular.

"And you are really going?" said the man with the shade, looking at
me again for the third time with that queer, unnatural tilting of the
face.

"This night of all nights!" whispered the old woman.

"It is what I came for," I said, and moved toward the door.  As I did
so, the old man with the shade rose and staggered round the table, so
as to be closer to the others and to the fire.  At the door I turned
and looked at them, and saw they were all close together, dark
against the firelight, staring at me over their shoulders, with an
intent expression on their ancient faces.

"Good-night," I said, setting the door open.

"It's your own choosing," said the man with the withered arm.

I left the door wide open until the candle was well alight, and then
I shut them in, and walked down the chilly, echoing passage.

I must confess that the oddness of these three old pensioners in
whose charge her ladyship had left the castle, and the deep-toned,
old-fashioned furniture of the housekeeper's room, in which they
foregathered, had affected me curiously in spite of my effort to keep
myself at a matter-of-fact phase.  They seemed to belong to another
age, an older age, an age when things spiritual were indeed to be
feared, when common sense was uncommon, an age when omens and witches
were credible, and ghosts beyond denying.  Their very existence,
thought I, is spectral; the cut of their clothing, fashions born in
dead brains; the ornaments and conveniences in the room about them
even are ghostly--the thoughts of vanished men, which still haunt
rather than participate in the world of to-day.  And the passage I
was in, long and shadowy, with a film of moisture glistening on the
wall, was as gaunt and cold as a thing that is dead and rigid.  But
with an effort I sent such thoughts to the right-about.  The long,
drafty subterranean passage was chilly and dusty, and my candle
flared and made the shadows cower and quiver.  The echoes rang up and
down the spiral staircase, and a shadow came sweeping up after me,
and another fled before me into the darkness overhead.  I came to the
wide landing and stopped there for a moment listening to a rustling
that I fancied I heard creeping behind me, and then, satisfied of the
absolute silence, pushed open the unwilling baize-covered door and
stood in the silent corridor.

The effect was scarcely what I expected, for the moonlight, coming in
by the great window on the grand staircase, picked out everything in
vivid black shadow or reticulated silvery illumination.  Everything
seemed in its proper position; the house might have been deserted on
the yesterday instead of twelve months ago.  There were candles in
the sockets of the sconces, and whatever dust had gathered on the
carpets or upon the polished flooring was distributed so evenly as to
be invisible in my candlelight.  A waiting stillness was over
everything.  I was about to advance, and stopped abruptly.  A bronze
group stood upon the landing hidden from me by a corner of the wall;
but its shadow fell with marvelous distinctness upon the white
paneling, and gave me the impression of some one crouching to waylay
me.  The thing jumped upon my attention suddenly.  I stood rigid for
half a moment, perhaps.  Then, with my hand in the pocket that held
the revolver, I advanced, only to discover a Ganymede and Eagle,
glistening in the moonlight.  That incident for a time restored my
nerve, and a dim porcelain Chinaman on a buhl table, whose head
rocked as I passed, scarcely startled me.

The door of the Red Room and the steps up to it were in a shadowy
corner.  I moved my candle from side to side in order to see clearly
the nature of the recess in which I stood, before opening the door.
Here it was, thought I, that my predecessor was found, and the memory
of that story gave me a sudden twinge of apprehension.  I glanced
over my shoulder at the black Ganymede in the moonlight, and opened
the door of the Red Room rather hastily, with my face half turned to
the pallid silence of the corridor.

I entered, closed the door behind me at once, turned the key I found
in the lock within, and stood with the candle held aloft surveying
the scene of my vigil, the great Red Room of Lorraine Castle, in
which the young Duke had died; or rather in which he had begun his
dying, for he had opened the door and fallen headlong down the steps
I had just ascended.  That had been the end of his vigil, of his
gallant attempt to conquer the ghostly tradition of the place, and
never, I thought, had apoplexy better served the ends of
superstition.  There were other and older stories that clung to the
room, back to the half-incredible beginning of it all, the tale of a
timid wife and the tragic end that came to her husband's jest of
frightening her.  And looking round that huge shadowy room with its
black window bays, its recesses and alcoves, its dusty brown-red
hangings and dark gigantic furniture, one could well understand the
legends that had sprouted in its black corners, its germinating
darknesses.  My candle was a little tongue of light in the vastness
of the chamber; its rays failed to pierce to the opposite end of the
room, and left an ocean of dull red mystery and suggestion, sentinel
shadows and watching darknesses beyond its island of light.  And the
stillness of desolation brooded over it all.

I must confess some impalpable quality of that ancient room disturbed
me.  I tried to fight the feeling down.  I resolved to make a
systematic examination of the place, and so, by leaving nothing to
the imagination, dispel the fanciful suggestions of the obscurity
before they obtained a hold upon me.  After satisfying myself of the
fastening of the door, I began to walk round the room, peering round
each article of furniture, tucking up the valances of the bed and
opening its curtains wide.  In one place there was a distinct echo to
my footsteps, the noises I made seemed so little that they enhanced
rather than broke the silence of the place.  I pulled up the blinds
and examined the fastenings of the several windows.  Attracted by the
fall of a particle of dust, I leaned forward and looked up the
blackness of the wide chimney.  Then, trying to preserve my
scientific attitude of mind, I walked round and began tapping the oak
paneling for any secret opening, but I desisted before reaching the
alcove.  I saw my face in a mirror--white.

There were two big mirrors in the room, each with a pair of sconces
bearing candles, and on the mantelshelf, too, were candles in china
candlesticks.  All these I lit one after the other.  The fire was
laid--an unexpected consideration from the old housekeeper--and I lit
it, to keep down any disposition to shiver, and when it was burning
well I stood round with my back to it and regarded the room again.  I
had pulled up a chintz-covered armchair and a table to form a kind of
barricade before me.  On this lay my revolver, ready to hand.  My
precise examination had done me a little good, but I still found the
remoter darkness of the place and its perfect stillness too
stimulating for the imagination.  The echoing of the stir and
crackling of the fire was no sort of comfort to me.  The shadow in
the alcove at the end of the room began to display that undefinable
quality of a presence, that odd suggestion of a lurking living thing
that comes so easily in silence and solitude.  And to reassure
myself, I walked with a candle into it and satisfied myself that
there was nothing tangible there.  I stood that candle upon the floor
of the alcove and left it in that position.

By this time I was in a state of considerable nervous tension,
although to my reason there was no adequate cause for my condition.
My mind, however, was perfectly clear.  I postulated quite
unreservedly that nothing supernatural could happen, and to pass the
time I began stringing some rhymes together, Ingoldsby fashion,
concerning the original legend of the place.  A few I spoke aloud,
but the echoes were not pleasant.  For the same reason I also
abandoned, after a time, a conversation with myself upon the
impossibility of ghosts and haunting.  My mind reverted to the three
old and distorted people downstairs, and I tried to keep it upon that
topic.

The sombre reds and grays of the room troubled me; even with its
seven candles the place was merely dim.  The light in the alcove
flaring in a draft, and the fire flickering, kept the shadows and
penumbra perpetually shifting and stirring in a noiseless flighty
dance.  Casting about for a remedy, I recalled the wax candles I had
seen in the corridor, and, with a slight effort, carrying a candle
and leaving the door open, I walked out into the moonlight, and
presently returned with as many as ten.  These I put in the various
knick-knacks of china with which the room was sparsely adorned, and
lit and placed them where the shadows had lain deepest, some on the
floor, some in the window recesses, arranging and rearranging them
until at last my seventeen candles were so placed that not an inch of
the room but had the direct light of at least one of them.  It
occurred to me that when the ghost came I could warn him not to trip
over them.  The room was now quite brightly illuminated.  There was
something very cheering and reassuring in these little silent
streaming flames, and to notice their steady diminution of length
offered me an occupation and gave me a reassuring sense of the
passage of time.

Even with that, however, the brooding expectation of the vigil
weighed heavily enough upon me.  I stood watching the minute hand of
my watch creep towards midnight.

Then something happened in the alcove.  I did not see the candle go
out, I simply turned and saw that the darkness was there, as one
might start and see the unexpected presence of a stranger.  The black
shadow had sprung back to its place.  "By Jove," said I aloud,
recovering from my surprise, "that draft's a strong one;" and taking
the matchbox from the table, I walked across the room in a leisurely
manner to relight the corner again.  My first match would not strike,
and as I succeeded with the second, something seemed to blink on the
wall before me.  I turned my head involuntarily and saw that the two
candles on the little table by the fireplace were extinguished.  I
rose at once to my feet.

"Odd," I said.  "Did I do that myself in a flash of
absent-mindedness?"

I walked back, relit one, and as I did so I saw the candle in the
right sconce of one of the mirrors wink and go right out, and almost
immediately its companion followed it.  The flames vanished as if the
wick had been suddenly nipped between a finger and thumb, leaving the
wick neither glowing nor smoking, but black.  While I stood gaping
the candle at the foot of the bed went out, and the shadows seemed to
take another step toward me.

"This won't do!" said I, and first one and then another candle on the
mantelshelf followed.

"What's up?" I cried, with a queer high note getting into my voice
somehow.  At that the candle on the corner of the wardrobe went out,
and the one I had relit in the alcove followed.

"Steady on!" I said, "those candles are wanted," speaking with a
half-hysterical facetiousness, and scratching away at a match the
while, "for the mantel candlesticks."  My hands trembled so much that
twice I missed the rough paper of the matchbox.  As the mantel
emerged from darkness again, two candles in the remoter end of the
room were eclipsed.  But with the same match I also relit the larger
mirror candles, and those on the floor near the doorway, so that for
the moment I seemed to gain on the extinctions.  But then in a
noiseless volley there vanished four lights at once in different
corners of the room, and I struck another match in quivering haste,
and stood hesitating whither to take it.

As I stood undecided, an invisible hand seemed to sweep out the two
candles on the table.  With a cry of terror I dashed at the alcove,
then into the corner and then into the window, relighting three as
two more vanished by the fireplace, and then, perceiving a better
way, I dropped matches on the iron-bound deedbox in the corner, and
caught up the bedroom candlestick.  With this I avoided the delay of
striking matches, but for all that the steady process of extinction
went on, and the shadows I feared and fought against returned, and
crept in upon me, first a step gained on this side of me, then on
that.  I was now almost frantic with the horror of the coming
darkness, and my self-possession deserted me.  I leaped panting from
candle to candle in a vain struggle against that remorseless advance.

I bruised myself in the thigh against the table, I sent a chair
headlong, I stumbled and fell and whisked the cloth from the table in
my fall.  My candle rolled away from me and I snatched another as I
rose.  Abruptly this was blown out as I swung it off the table by the
wind of my sudden movement, and immediately the two remaining candles
followed.  But there was light still in the room, a red light, that
streamed across the ceiling and staved off the shadows from me.  The
fire!  Of course I could still thrust my candle between the bars and
relight it!

I turned to where the flames were still dancing between the glowing
coals and splashing red reflections upon the furniture; made two
steps toward the grate, and incontinently the flames dwindled and
vanished, the glow vanished, the reflections rushed together and
disappeared, and as I thrust the candle between the bars darkness
closed upon me like the shutting of an eye, wrapped about me in a
stifling embrace, sealed my vision, and crushed the last vestiges of
self-possession from my brain.  And it was not only palpable
darkness, but intolerable terror.  The candle fell from my hands.  I
flung out my arms in a vain effort to thrust that ponderous blackness
away from me, and lifting up my voice, screamed with all my might,
once, twice, thrice.  Then I think I must have staggered to my feet.
I know I thought suddenly of the moonlit corridor, and with my head
bowed and my arms over my face, made a stumbling run for the door.

But I had forgotten the exact position of the door, and I struck
myself heavily against the corner of the bed.  I staggered back,
turned, and was either struck or struck myself against some other
bulky furnishing.  I have a vague memory of battering myself thus to
and fro in the darkness, of a heavy blow at last upon my forehead, of
a horrible sensation of falling that lasted an age, of my last
frantic effort to keep my footing, and then I remember no more.

I opened my eyes in daylight.  My head was roughly bandaged, and the
man with the withered hand was watching my face.  I looked about me
trying to remember what had happened, and for a space I could not
recollect.  I rolled my eyes into the corner and saw the old woman,
no longer abstracted, no longer terrible, pouring out some drops of
medicine from a little blue phial into a glass.  "Where am I?" I
said.  "I seem to remember you, and yet I can not remember who you
are."

They told me then, and I heard of the haunted Red Room as one who
hears a tale.  "We found you at dawn," said he, "and there was blood
on your forehead and lips."

I wondered that I had ever disliked him.  The three of them in the
daylight seemed commonplace old folk enough.  The man with the green
shade had his head bent as one who sleeps.

It was very slowly I recovered the memory of my experience.  "You
believe now," said the old man with the withered hand, "that the room
is haunted?"  He spoke no longer as one who greets an intruder, but
as one who condoles with a friend.

"Yes," said I, "the room is haunted."

"And you have seen it.  And we who have been here all our lives have
never set eyes upon it.  Because we have never dared.  Tell us, is it
truly the old earl who--"

"No," said I, "it is not."

"I told you so," said the old lady, with the glass in her hand.  "It
is his poor young countess who was frightened--"

"It is not," I said.  "There is neither ghost of earl nor ghost of
countess in that room; there is no ghost there at all, but worse, far
worse, something impalpable--"

"Well?" they said.

"The worst of all the things that haunt poor mortal men," said I;
"and that is, in all its nakedness--'Fear!'  Fear that will not have
light nor sound, that will not bear with reason, that deafens and
darkens and overwhelms.  It followed me through the corridor, it
fought against me in the room--"

I stopped abruptly.  There was an interval of silence.  My hand went
up to my bandages.  "The candles went out one after another, and I
fled--"

Then the man with the shade lifted his face sideways to see me and
spoke.

"That is it," said he.  "I knew that was it.  A Power of Darkness.
To put such a curse upon a home!  It lurks there always.  You can
feel it even in the daytime, even of a bright summer's day, in the
hangings, in the curtains, keeping behind you however you face about.
In the dusk it creeps in the corridor and follows you, so that you
dare not turn.  It is even as you say.  Fear itself is in that room.
Black Fear...  And there it will be ... so long as this house of sin
endures."




THE PHANTOM 'RICKSHAW

BY RUDYARD KIPLING

_Joseph Rudyard Kipling was born in Bombay in 1865.  The grandson of
a clergyman, both on his father's and mother's side, he was educated
in England and served his apprenticeship as a writer on the
newspapers in India.  No man ever tried harder to convey to his
reader the sensation and very pulse of life that he himself felt than
did Kipling in his early work, of which "The Phantom 'Rickshaw" is a
well-known example.  Though he is undoubtedly one of the great
writers of short stories, we are still too near him to be able to
clearly appreciate his great talents._



THE PHANTOM 'RICKSHAW

By RUDYARD KIPLING

My doctor tells me that I need rest and change of air.  It is not
improbable that I shall get both ere long--rest that neither the
red-coated messenger nor the midday gun can break, and change of air
far beyond that which any homeward-bound steamer can give me.  In the
meantime, I am resolved to stay where I am; and, in flat defiance of
my doctor's orders, to take all the world into my confidence.  You
shall learn for yourselves the precise nature of my malady; and
shall, too, judge for yourselves whether any man born of woman on
this weary earth was ever so tormented as I.

Speaking now as a condemned criminal might speak ere the drop-bolts
are drawn, my story, wild and hideously improbable as it may appear,
demands at least attention.  That it will ever receive credence I
utterly disbelieve.  Two months ago I should have scouted as mad or
drunk the man who had dared tell me the like.  Two months ago I was
the happiest man in India.  To-day, from Peshawur to the sea, there
is no one more wretched.  My doctor and I are the only two who know
this.  His explanation is, that my brain, digestion, and eyesight are
all slightly affected; giving rise to my frequent and persistent
"delusions."  Delusions, indeed!  I call him a fool; but he attends
me still with the same unwearied smile, the same bland professional
manner, the same neatly trimmed red whiskers, till I begin to suspect
that I am an ungrateful, evil-tempered invalid.  But you shall judge
for yourselves.

Three years ago it was my fortune--my great misfortune--to sail from
Gravesend to Bombay, on return from long leave, with one Agnes
Keith-Wessington, wife of an officer on the Bombay side.  It does not
in the least concern you to know what manner of woman she was.  Be
content with the knowledge that, ere the voyage had ended, both she
and I were desperately and unreasonably in love with each other.
Heaven knows that I can make the admission now without one particle
of vanity.  In matters of this sort there is always one who gives and
another who accepts.  From the first day of our ill-omened
attachment, I was conscious that Agnes's passion was a stronger, a
more dominant, and--if I may use the expression--a purer sentiment
than mine.  Whether she recognized the fact then, I do not know.
Afterward it was bitterly plain to both of us.

Arrived at Bombay in the spring of the year, we went our respective
ways, to meet no more for the next three or four months, when my
leave and her love took us both to Simla.  There we spent the season
together; and there my fire of straw burned itself out to a pitiful
end with the closing year.  I attempt no excuse.  I make no apology.
Mrs. Wessington had given up much for my sake, and was prepared to
give up all.  From my own lips, in August, 1882, she learned that I
was sick of her presence, tired of her company, and weary of the
sound of her voice.  Ninety-nine women out of a hundred would have
wearied of me as I wearied of them; seventy-five of that number would
have promptly avenged themselves by active and obtrusive flirtation
with other men.  Mrs. Wessington was the hundredth.  On her neither
my openly expressed aversion nor the cutting brutalities with which I
garnished our interviews had the least effect.

"Jack, darling!" was her one eternal cuckoo cry, "I'm sure it's all a
mistake--a hideous mistake; and we'll be good friends again some day.
_Please_ forgive me, Jack dear."

I was the offender, and I knew it.  That knowledge transformed my
pity into passive endurance, and, eventually, into blind hate--the
same instinct, I suppose, which prompts a man to savagely stamp on
the spider he has but half killed.  And with this hate in my bosom
the season of 1882 came to an end.

Next year we met again at Simla--she with her monotonous face and
timid attempts at reconciliation, and I with loathing of her in every
fibre of my frame.  Several times I could not avoid meeting her
alone; and on each occasion her words were identically the same.
Still the unreasoning wail that it was all a "mistake"; and still the
hope of eventually "making friends."  I might have seen, had I cared
to look, that that hope only was keeping her alive.  She grew more
wan and thin month by month.  You will agree with me, at least, that
such conduct would have driven any one to despair.  It was uncalled
for; childish; unwomanly.  I maintain that she was much to blame.
And again, sometimes, in the black, fever-stricken night-watches, I
have begun to think that I might have been a little kinder to her.
But that really is a "delusion."  I could not have continued
pretending to love her when I didn't; could I?  It would have been
unfair to us both.

Last year we met again--on the same terms as before.  The same weary
appeals, and the same curt answers from my lips.  At least I would
make her see how wholly wrong and hopeless were her attempts at
resuming the old relationship.  As the season wore on, we fell
apart--that is to say, she found it difficult to meet me, for I had
other and more absorbing interests to attend to.  When I think it
over quietly in my sick-room, the season of 1884 seems a confused
nightmare wherein light and shade were fantastically intermingled--my
courtship of little Kitty Mannering; my hopes, doubts, and fears; our
long rides together; my trembling avowal of attachment; her reply;
and now and again a vision of a white face flitting by in the
'rickshaw with the black and white liveries I once watched for so
earnestly; the wave of Mrs. Wessington's gloved hand; and, when she
met me alone, which was but seldom, the irksome monotony of her
appeal.  I loved Kitty Mannering; honestly, heartily loved her, and
with my love for her grew my hatred for Agnes.  In August, Kitty and
I were engaged.  The next day I met those accursed "magpie"
jhampanies at the back of Jakko, and, moved by some passing sentiment
of pity, stopped to tell Mrs. Wessington everything.  She knew it
already.

"So I hear you're engaged, Jack dear."  Then, without a moment's
pause--"I'm sure it's all a mistake--a hideous mistake.  We shall be
as good friends some day, Jack, as we ever were."

My answer might have made even a man wince.  It cut the dying woman
before me like the blow of a whip.  "Please forgive me, Jack; I
didn't mean to make you angry; but it's true, it's true!"

And Mrs. Wessington broke down completely.  I turned away and left
her to finish her journey in peace, feeling, but only for a moment or
two, that I had been an unutterably mean hound.  I looked back, and
saw that she had turned her 'rickshaw with the idea, I suppose, of
overtaking me.

The scene and its surroundings were photographed on my memory.  The
rain-swept sky (we were at the end of the wet weather), the sodden,
dingy pines, the muddy road, and the black powder-riven cliffs formed
a gloomy background against which the black and white liveries of the
jhampanies, the yellow-paneled 'rickshaw and Mrs. Wessington's
down-bowed golden head stood out clearly.  She was holding her
handkerchief in her left hand and was leaning back exhausted against
the 'rickshaw cushions.  I turned my horse up a by-path near the
Sanjoylie Reservoir and literally ran away.  Once I fancied I heard a
faint call of "Jack!"  This may have been imagination.  I never
stopped to verify it.  Ten minutes later I came across Kitty on
horseback; and, in the delight of a long ride with her, forgot all
about the interview.

A week later Mrs. Wessington died, and the inexpressible burden of
her existence was removed from my life.  I went plainsward perfectly
happy.  Before three months were over I had forgotten all about her,
except that at times the discovery of some of her old letters
reminded me unpleasantly of our bygone relationship.  By January I
had disinterred what was left of our correspondence from among my
scattered belongings and had burned it.  At the beginning of April of
this year, 1885, I was at Simla--semi-deserted Simla--once more, and
was deep in lover's talks and walks with Kitty.  It was decided that
we should be married at the end of June.  You will understand,
therefore, that, loving Kitty as I did, I am not saying too much when
I pronounce myself to have been, at that time, the happiest man in
India.

Fourteen delightful days passed almost before I noticed their flight.
Then, aroused to the sense of what was proper among mortals
circumstanced as we were, I pointed out to Kitty that an
engagement-ring was the outward and visible sign of her dignity as an
engaged girl; and that she must forthwith come to Hamilton's to be
measured for one.  Up to that moment, I give you my word, we had
completely forgotten so trivial a matter.  To Hamilton's we
accordingly went on the 15th of April, 1885.  Remember that--whatever
my doctor may say to the contrary--I was then in perfect health,
enjoying a well-balanced mind and an absolutely tranquil spirit.
Kitty and I entered Hamilton's shop together, and there, regardless
of the order of affairs, I measured Kitty for the ring in the
presence of the amused assistant.  The ring was a sapphire with two
diamonds.  We then rode out down the slope that leads to the
Combermere Bridge and Peliti's shop.

While my waler was cautiously feeling his way over the loose shale,
and Kitty was laughing and chattering at my side--while all Simla,
that is to say as much of it as had then come from the plains, was
grouped round the reading-room and Peliti's veranda--I was aware that
some one, apparently at a vast distance, was calling me by my
Christian name.  It struck me that I had heard the voice before, but
when and where I could not at once determine.  In the short space it
took to cover the road between the path from Hamilton's shop and the
first plank of the Combermere Bridge I had thought over half a dozen
people who might have committed such a solecism, and had eventually
decided that it must have been some singing in my ears.  Immediately
opposite Peliti's shop my eye was arrested by the sight of four
jhampanies in "magpie" livery, pulling a yellow-paneled, cheap,
bazaar 'rickshaw.  In a moment my mind flew back to the previous
season and Mrs. Wessington with a sense of irritation and disgust.
Was it not enough that the woman was dead and done with, without her
black and white servitors reappearing to spoil the day's happiness?
Whoever employed them now I thought I would call upon, and ask as a
personal favor to change her jhampanies' livery.  I would hire the
men myself, and, if necessary, buy their coats from off their backs.
It is impossible to say here what a flood of undesirable memories
their presence evoked.

"Kitty," I cried, "there are poor Mrs. Wessington's jhampanies turned
up again!  I wonder who has them now?"

Kitty had known Mrs. Wessington slightly last season, and had always
been interested in the sickly woman.

"What?  Where?" she asked.  "I can't see them anywhere."

Even as she spoke, her horse, swerving from a laden mule, threw
himself directly in front of the advancing 'rickshaw.  I had scarcely
time to utter a word of warning when, to my unutterable horror, horse
and rider passed through men and carriage as if they had been thin
air.

"What's the matter?" cried Kitty; "what made you call out so
foolishly, Jack?  If I am engaged I don't want all creation to know
about it.  There was lots of space between the mule and the veranda;
and, if you think I can't ride--There!"

Whereupon wilful Kitty set off, her dainty little head in the air, at
a hand-gallop in the direction of the band-stand; fully expecting, as
she herself afterward told me, that I should follow her.  What was
the matter?  Nothing indeed.  Either that I was mad or drunk, or that
Simla was haunted with devils.  I reined in my impatient cob, and
turned round.  The 'rickshaw had turned too, and now stood
immediately facing me, near the left railing of the Combermere Bridge.

"Jack!  Jack, darling!" (There was no mistake about the words this
time; they rang through my brain as if they had been shouted in my
ear.) "It's some hideous mistake, I'm sure.  Please forgive me, Jack,
and let's be friends again."

The 'rickshaw-hood had fallen back, and inside, as I hope and pray
daily for the death I dread by night, sat Mrs. Keith-Wessington,
handkerchief in hand, and golden head bowed on her breast.

How long I stared motionless I do not know.  Finally, I was aroused
by my syce taking the waler's bridle and asking whether I was ill.
From the horrible to the commonplace is but a step.  I tumbled off my
horse and dashed, half fainting, into Peliti's for a glass of cherry
brandy.  There two or three couples were gathered round the
coffee-tables discussing the gossip of the day.  Their trivialities
were more comforting to me just then than the consolations of
religion could have been.  I plunged into the midst of the
conversation at once; chatted, laughed, and jested with a face (when
I caught a glimpse of it in a mirror) as white and drawn as that of a
corpse.  Three or four men noticed my condition; and, evidently
setting it down to the results of overmany pegs, charitably
endeavored to draw me apart from the rest of the loungers.  But I
refused to be led away.  I wanted the company of my kind--as a child
rushes into the midst of the dinner party after a fright in the dark.
I must have talked for about ten minutes or so, though it seemed an
eternity to me, when I heard Kitty's clear voice outside inquiring
for me.  In another minute she had entered the shop, prepared to
roundly upbraid me for failing so signally in my duties.  Something
in my face stopped her.

"Why, Jack," she cried, "what have you been doing?  What has
happened?  Are you ill?"  Thus driven into a direct lie, I said that
the sun had been a little too much for me.  It was close upon five
o'clock of a cloudy April afternoon, and the sun had been hidden all
day.  I saw my mistake as soon as the words were out of my mouth;
attempted to recover it; blundered hopelessly and followed Kitty, in
a regal rage, out-of-doors, amid the smiles of my acquaintances.  I
made some excuse (I have forgotten what) on the score of my feeling
faint; and cantered away to my hotel, leaving Kitty to finish the
ride by herself.

In my room I sat down and tried calmly to reason out the matter.
Here was I, Theobald Jack Pansay, a well-educated Bengal civilian in
the year of grace 1885, presumably sane, certainly healthy, driven in
terror from my sweetheart's side by the apparition of a woman who had
been dead and buried eight months ago.  These were facts that I could
not blink.  Nothing was further from my thought than any memory of
Mrs. Wessington when Kitty and I left Hamilton's shop.  Nothing was
more utterly commonplace than the stretch of wall opposite Peliti's.
It was broad daylight.  The road was full of people; and yet here,
look you, in defiance of every law of probability, in direct outrage
of Nature's ordinance, there had appeared to me a face from the grave.

Kitty's Arab had gone through the 'rickshaw; so that my first hope
that some woman marvelously like Mrs. Wessington had hired the
carriage and the coolies with their old livery was lost.  Again and
again I went round this treadmill of thought; and again and again
gave up, baffled and in despair.  The voice was as inexplicable as
the apparition.  I had originally some wild notion of confiding it
all to Kitty; of begging her to marry me at once; and in her arms
defying the ghostly occupant of the 'rickshaw.  "After all," I
argued, "the presence of the 'rickshaw is in itself enough to prove
the existence of a spectral illusion.  One may see ghosts of men and
women, but surely never of coolies and carriages.  The whole thing is
absurd.  Fancy the ghost of a hill-man!"

Next morning I sent a penitent note to Kitty, imploring her to
overlook my strange conduct of the previous afternoon.  My divinity
was still very wroth, and a personal apology was necessary.  I
explained, with a fluency born of night-long pondering over a
falsehood, that I had been attacked with a sudden palpitation of the
heart--the result of indigestion.  This eminently practical solution
had its effect; and Kitty and I rode out that afternoon with the
shadow of my first lie dividing us.

Nothing could please her save a canter round Jakko.  With my nerves
still unstrung from the previous night, I feebly protested against
the notion, suggesting Observatory Hill, Jutogh, the Boileaugunge
road--anything rather than the Jakko round.  Kitty was angry and a
little hurt; so I yielded from fear of provoking further
misunderstanding, and we set out together toward Chota Simla.  We
walked a greater part of the way, and, according to our custom,
cantered from a mile or so below the convent to the stretch of level
road by the Sanjowlie Reservoir.  The wretched horses appeared to
fly, and my heart beat quicker and quicker as we neared the crest of
the ascent.  My mind had been full of Mrs. Wessington all the
afternoon; and every inch of the Jakko road bore witness to our
old-time walks and talks.  The boulders were full of it; the pines
sung it aloud overhead; the rain-fed torrent giggled and chuckled
unseen over the shameful story; and the wind in my ears chanted the
iniquity aloud.

As a fitting climax, in the middle of the level men call the Lady's
Mile, the horror was awaiting me.  No other 'rickshaw was in
sight--only the four black and white jhampanies, the yellow-paneled
carriage, and the golden head of a woman within--all apparently just
as I had left them eight months and one fortnight ago!  For an
instant I fancied that Kitty must see what I saw--we were so
marvelously sympathetic in all things.  Her next words undeceived
me--"Not a soul in sight!  Come along, Jack, and I'll race you to the
reservoir buildings!"  Her wiry little Arab was off like a bird, my
waler following close behind, and in this order we dashed under the
cliffs.  Half a minute brought us within fifty yards of the
'rickshaw.  I pulled my waler and fell back a little.  The 'rickshaw
was directly in the middle of the road; and once more the Arab passed
through it, my horse following.  "Jack!  Jack, dear!  Please forgive
me," rang with a wail in my ears, and, after an interval: "It's all a
mistake, a hideous mistake!"

I spurred my horse like a man possessed.  When I turned my head at
the reservoir works, the black and white liveries were still
waiting--patiently waiting--under the gray hillside, and the wind
brought me a mocking echo of the words I had just heard.  Kitty
bantered me a good deal on my silence throughout the remainder of the
ride.  I had been talking up till then wildly and at random.  To save
my life I could not speak naturally afterward, and from Sanjowlie to
the church wisely held my tongue.

I was to dine with the Mannerings that night, and had barely time to
canter home to dress.  On the road to Elysium Hill I overheard two
men talking together in the dusk--"It's a curious thing," said one,
"how completely all trace of it disappeared.  You know my wife was
insanely fond of the woman (never could see anything in her myself),
and wanted me to pick up her old 'rickshaw and coolies if they were
to be got for love or money.  Morbid sort of fancy I call it; but
I've got to do what the Memsahib tells me.  Would you believe that
the man she hired it from tells me that all four of the men--they
were brothers--died of cholera on the way to Hardwar, poor devils;
and the 'rickshaw has been broken up by the man himself.  Told me he
never used a dead Memsahib's 'rickshaw.  Spoiled his luck.  Queer
notion, wasn't it?  Fancy poor little Mrs. Wessington spoiling any
one's luck except her own!"  I laughed aloud at this point; and my
laugh jarred on me as I uttered it.  So there were ghosts of
'rickshaws after all, and ghostly employments in the other world!
How much did Mrs. Wessington give her men?  What were their hours?
Where did they go?

And for visible answer to my last question I saw the infernal thing
blocking my path in the twilight.  The dead travel fast, and by short
cuts unknown to ordinary coolies.  I laughed aloud a second time and
checked my laughter suddenly, for I was afraid I was going mad.  Mad
to a certain extent I must have been, for I recollect that I reined
in my horse at the head of the 'rickshaw, and politely wished Mrs.
Wessington "Good-evening."  Her answer was one I knew only too well.
I listened to the end; and replied that I had heard it all before,
but should be delighted if she had anything further to say.  Some
malignant devil stronger than I must have entered into me that
evening, for I have a dim recollection of talking the commonplaces of
the day for five minutes to the thing in front of me.

"Mad as a hatter, poor devil--or drunk.  Max, try and get him to come
home."

Surely that was not Mrs. Wessington's voice!  The two men had
overheard me speaking to the empty air, and had returned to look
after me.  They were very kind and considerate, and from their words
evidently gathered that I was extremely drunk.  I thanked them
confusedly and cantered away to my hotel, there changed, and arrived
at the Mannerings' ten minutes late.  I pleaded the darkness of the
night as an excuse; was rebuked by Kitty for my unlover-like
tardiness; and sat down.

The conversation had already become general; and under cover of it I
was addressing some tender small-talk to my sweetheart when I was
aware that at the further end of the table a short, red-whiskered man
was describing, with much broidery, his encounter with a man unknown
that evening.  A few sentences convinced me that he was repeating the
incident of half an hour ago.  In the middle of the story he looked
round for applause, as professional story-tellers do, caught my eyes,
and straightway collapsed.  There was a moment's awkward silence, and
the red-whiskered man muttered something to the effect that he had
"forgotten the rest," thereby sacrificing a reputation as a good
story-teller which he had built up for six seasons past.  I blessed
him from the bottom of my heart, and--went on with my fish.

In the fulness of time that dinner came to an end; and with genuine
regret I tore myself away from Kitty--as certain as I was of my own
existence that It would be waiting for me outside the door.  The
red-whiskered man, who had been introduced to me as Dr. Heatherlegh
of Simla, volunteered to bear me company as far as our roads lay
together.  I accepted his offer with gratitude.

My instinct had not deceived me.  It lay in readiness in the Mall,
and, in what seemed devilish mockery of our ways, with a lighted
head-lamp.  The red-whiskered man went to the point at once, in a
manner that showed he had been thinking over it all dinner-time.

"I say, Pansay, what the deuce was the matter with you this evening
on the Elysium road?"  The suddenness of the question wrenched an
answer from me before I was aware.

"That!" said I, pointing to It.

"That may be either D. T. or Eyes for aught I know.  Now, you don't
liquor.  I saw as much at dinner, so it can't be D. T.  There's
nothing whatever where you're pointing, though you're sweating and
trembling with fright like a scared pony.  Therefore, I conclude that
it's Eyes.  And I ought to understand all about them.  Come along
home with me.  I'm on the Blessington lower road."

To my intense delight the 'rickshaw, instead of waiting for us, kept
about twenty yards ahead--and this, too, whether we walked, trotted,
or cantered.  In the course of that long night ride I had told my
companion almost as much as I have told you here.

"Well, you've spoiled one of the best tales I've ever laid tongue
to," said he, "but I'll forgive you for the sake of what you've gone
through.  Now, come home and do what I tell you; and when I've cured
you, young man, let this be a lesson to you to steer clear of women
and indigestible food till the day of your death."

The 'rickshaw kept steady in front; and my red-whiskered friend
seemed to derive great pleasure from my account of its exact
whereabout.

"Eyes, Pansay--all Eyes, Brain, and Stomach.  And the greatest of
these three is Stomach.  You've too much conceited brain, too little
stomach, and thoroughly unhealthy eyes.  Get your stomach straight
and the rest follows.  And all that's French for a liver pill.  I'll
take sole medical charge of you from this hour! for you're too
interesting a phenomenon to be passed over."

By this time we were deep in the shadow of the Blessington lower road
and the 'rickshaw came to a dead stop under a pine-clad, overhanging
shale cliff.  Instinctively I halted, too, giving my reason.
Heatherlegh rapped out an oath.

"Now, if you think I'm going to spend a cold night on the hillside
for the sake of a Stomach-cum-Brain-cum-Eye illusion ... Lord ha'
mercy!  What's that?"

There was a muffled report, a blinding smother of dust just in front
of us, a crack, the noise of rent boughs, and about ten yards of the
cliff-side--pines, undergrowth, and all--slid down into the road
below, completely blocking it up.  The uprooted trees swayed and
tottered for a moment like drunken giants in the gloom, and then fell
prone among their fellows with a thunderous crash.  Our two horses
stood motionless and sweating with fear.  As soon as the rattle of
falling earth and stone had subsided, my companion muttered: "Man, if
we'd gone forward we should have been ten feet deep in our graves by
now.  'There are more things in heaven and earth--'  Come home,
Pansay, and thank God.  I want a peg badly."

We retraced our way over the Church Ridge, and I arrived at Dr.
Heatherlegh's house shortly after midnight.

His attempts toward my cure commenced almost immediately, and for a
week I never left his sight.  Many a time in the course of that week
did I bless the good fortune which had thrown me in contact with
Simla's best and kindest doctor.  Day by day my spirits grew lighter
and more equable.  Day by day, too, I became more and more inclined
to fall in with Heatherlegh's "spectral illusion" theory, implicating
eyes, brain, and stomach.  I wrote to Kitty, telling her that a
slight sprain caused by a fall from my horse kept me indoors for a
few days; and that I should be recovered before she had time to
regret my absence.

Heatherlegh's treatment was simple to a degree.  It consisted of
liver pills, cold water baths, and strong exercise, taken in the dusk
or at early dawn--for, as he sagely observed: "A man with a sprained
ankle doesn't walk a dozen miles a day, and your young woman might be
wondering if she saw you."

At the end of the week, after much examination of pupil and pulse,
and strict injunctions as to diet and pedestrianism, Heatherlegh
dismissed me as bruskly as he had taken charge of me.  Here is his
parting benediction: "Man, I certify to your mental cure, and that's
as much as to say I've cured most of your bodily ailments.  Now, get
your traps out of this as soon as you can; and be off to make love to
Miss Kitty."

I was endeavoring to express my thanks for his kindness.  He cut me
short.

"Don't think I did this because I like you.  I gather that you've
behaved like a blackguard all through.  But, all the same, you're a
phenomenon, and as queer a phenomenon as you are a blackguard.
No!"--checking me a second time--"not a rupee, please.  Go out and
see if you can find the eyes-brain-and-stomach business again.  I'll
give you a lakh for each time you see it."

Half an hour later I was in the Mannerings' drawing-room with
Kitty--drunk with the intoxication of present happiness and the
foreknowledge that I should never more be troubled with Its hideous
presence.  Strong in the sense of my new-found security, I proposed a
ride at once; and, by preference, a canter round Jakko.

Never had I felt so well, so overladen with vitality and mere animal
spirits, as I did on the afternoon of the 30th of April.  Kitty was
delighted at the change in my appearance, and complimented me on it
in her delightfully frank and outspoken manner.  We left the
Mannerings' house together, laughing and talking, and cantered along
the Chota Simla road as of old.

I was in haste to reach the Sanjowlie Reservoir and there make my
assurance doubly sure.  The horses did their best, but seemed all too
slow to my impatient mind.  Kitty was astonished at my
boisterousness.  "Why, Jack!" she cried at last, "you are behaving
like a child.  What are you doing?"

We were just below the convent, and from sheer wantonness I was
making my waler plunge and curvet across the road as I tickled it
with the loop of my riding-whip.

"Doing?" I answered; "nothing, dear.  That's just it.  If you'd been
doing nothing for a week except lie up, you'd be as riotous as I.

  "'Singing and murmuring in your feastful mirth,
    Joying to feel yourself alive;
  Lord over Nature, Lord of the visible Earth,
    Lord of the senses five.'"


My quotation was hardly out of my lips before we had rounded the
corner above the convent, and a few yards further on could see across
to Sanjowlie.  In the centre of the level road stood the black and
white liveries, the yellow-paneled 'rickshaw, and Mrs.
Keith-Wessington.  I pulled up, looked, rubbed my eyes, and, I
believe, must have said something.  The next thing I knew was that I
was lying face downward on the road, with Kitty kneeling above me in
tears.

"Has it gone, child?" I gasped.  Kitty only wept more bitterly.

"Has what gone, Jack dear?  What does it all mean?  There must be a
mistake somewhere, Jack.  A hideous mistake."  Her last words brought
me to my feet--mad--raving for the time being.

"Yes, there is a mistake somewhere," I repeated, "a hideous mistake.
Come and look at It."

I have an indistinct idea that I dragged Kitty by the wrist along the
road up to where It stood, and implored her for pity's sake to speak
to It; to tell It that we were betrothed; that neither death nor hell
could break the tie between us; and Kitty only knows how much more to
the same effect.  Now and again I appealed passionately to the terror
in the 'rickshaw to bear witness to all I had said, and to release me
from a torture that was killing me.  As I talked I suppose I must
have told Kitty of my old relations with Mrs. Wessington, for I saw
her listen intently with white face and blazing eyes.

"Thank you, Mr. Pansay," she said, "that's quite enough.  Syce ghora
láo."

The syces, impassive as Orientals always are, had come up with the
recaptured horses; and as Kitty sprang into her saddle I caught hold
of the bridle, entreating her to hear me out and forgive.  My answer
was the cut of her riding-whip across my face from mouth to eye, and
a word or two of farewell that even now I can not write down.  So I
judged, and judged rightly, that Kitty knew all; and I staggered back
to the side of the 'rickshaw.  My face was cut and bleeding, and the
blow of the riding-whip had raised a livid blue wheal on it.  I had
no self-respect.  Just then, Heatherlegh, who must have been
following Kitty and me at a distance, cantered up.

"Doctor," I said, pointing to my face, "here's Miss Mannering's
signature to my order of dismissal, and I'll thank you for that lakh
as soon as convenient."

Heatherlegh's face, even in my abject misery, moved me to laughter.

"I'll stake my professional reputation--" he began.

"Don't be a fool," I whispered.  "I've lost my life's happiness and
you'd better take me home."

As I spoke the 'rickshaw was gone.  Then I lost all knowledge of what
was passing.  The crest of Jakko seemed to heave and roll like the
crest of a cloud and fall in upon me.

Seven days later (on the 7th of May, that is to say) I was aware that
I was lying in Heatherlegh's room as weak as a little child.
Heatherlegh was watching me intently from behind the papers on his
writing-table.  His first words were not encouraging; but I was too
far spent to be much moved by them.

"Here's Miss Kitty has sent back your letters.  You corresponded a
good deal, you young people.  Here's a packet that looks like a ring,
and a cheerful sort of a note from Mannering Papa, which I've taken
the liberty of reading and burning.  The old gentleman's not pleased
with you."

"And Kitty?" I asked dully.

"Rather more drawn than her father from what she says.  By the same
token you must have been letting out any number of queer
reminiscences just before I met you.  Says that a man who would have
behaved to a woman as you did to Mrs. Wessington ought to kill
himself out of sheer pity for his kind.  She's a hot-headed little
virago, your mash.  Will have it too that you were suffering from D.
T. when that row on the Jakko road turned up.  Says she'll die before
she ever speaks to you again."

I groaned and turned over on the other side.

"Now, you've got your choice, my friend.  This engagement has to be
broken off; and the Mannerings don't want to be too hard on you.  Was
it broken through D. T. or epileptic fits?  Sorry I can't offer you a
better exchange unless you'd prefer hereditary insanity.  Say the
word and I'll tell 'em it's fits.  All Simla knows about that scene
on the Ladies' Mile.  Come!  I'll give you five minutes to think over
it."

During those five minutes I believe that I explored thoroughly the
lowest circles of the Inferno which it is permitted man to tread on
earth.  And at the same time I myself was watching myself faltering
through the dark labyrinths of doubt, misery, and utter despair.  I
wondered, as Heatherlegh in his chair might have wondered, which
dreadful alternative I should adopt.  Presently I heard myself
answering in a voice that I hardly recognized:

"They're confoundedly particular about morality in these parts.  Give
'em fits, Heatherlegh, and my love.  Now, let me sleep a bit longer."

Then my two selves joined, and it was only I (half crazed,
devil-driven I) that tossed in my bed, tracing step by step the
history of the past month.

"But I am in Simla," I kept repeating to myself.  "I, Jack Pansay, am
in Simla, and there are no ghosts here.  It's unreasonable of that
woman to pretend there are.  Why couldn't Agnes have left me alone?
I never did her any harm.  It might just as well have been me as
Agnes.  Only I'd never have come back on purpose to kill her.  Why
can't I be left alone--left alone and happy?"

It was high noon when I first awoke; and the sun was low in the sky
before I slept--slept as the tortured criminal sleeps on his rack,
too worn to feel further pain.

Next day I could not leave my bed.  Heatherlegh told me in the
morning that he had received an answer from Mr. Mannering, and that,
thanks to his (Heatherlegh's) friendly offices, the story of my
affliction had traveled through the length and breadth of Simla,
where I was on all sides much pitied.

"And that's rather more than you deserve," he concluded, pleasantly,
"though the Lord knows you've been going through a pretty severe
mill.  Never mind; we'll cure you yet, you perverse phenomenon."

I declined firmly to be cured.  "You've been much too good to me
already, old man," said I; "but I don't think I need trouble you
further."

In my heart I knew that nothing Heatherlegh could do would lighten
the burden that had been laid upon me.

With that knowledge came also a sense of hopeless, impotent rebellion
against the unreasonableness of it all.  There were scores of men no
better than I whose punishments had at least been reserved for
another world; and I felt that it was bitterly, cruelly unfair that I
alone should have been singled out for so hideous a fate.  This mood
would in time give place to another where it seemed that the
'rickshaw and I were the only realities in a world of shadows; that
Kitty was a ghost; that Mannering, Heatherlegh, and all the other men
and women I knew were all ghosts; and the great, gray hills
themselves but vain shadows devised to torture me.  From mood to mood
I tossed backward and forward for seven weary days; my body growing
daily stronger and stronger, until the bedroom looking-glass told me
that I had returned to every day life, and was as other men once
more.  Curiously enough my face showed no signs of the struggle I had
gone through.  It was pale indeed, but as expressionless and
commonplace as ever.  I had expected some permanent
alteration--visible evidence of the disease that was eating me away.
I found nothing.

On the 15th of May I left Heatherlegh's house at eleven o'clock in
the morning; and the instinct of the bachelor drove me to the club.
There I found that every man knew my story as told by Heatherlegh,
and was, in clumsy fashion, abnormally kind and attentive.
Nevertheless, I recognized that for the rest of my natural life I
should be among but not of my fellows; and I envied very bitterly
indeed the laughing coolies on the Mall below.  I lunched at the
club, and at four o'clock wandered aimlessly down the Mall in the
vague hope of meeting Kitty.  Close to the band-stand the black and
white liveries joined me; and I heard Mrs. Wessington's old appeal at
my side.  I had been expecting this ever since I came out; and was
only surprised at her delay.  The phantom 'rickshaw and I went side
by side along the Chota Simla road in silence.  Close to the bazaar,
Kitty and a man on horseback overtook and passed us.  For any sign
she gave I might have been a dog in the road.  She did not even pay
me the compliment of quickening her pace; though the rainy afternoon
had served for an excuse.

So Kitty and her companion, and I and my ghostly light-o'-love, crept
round Jakko in couples.  The road was streaming with water; the pines
dripped like roof-pipes on the rocks below, and the air was full of
fine, driving rain.  Two or three times I found myself saying to
myself almost aloud: "I'm Jack Pansay on leave at Simla--at Simla!
Everyday, ordinary Simla.  I mustn't forget that--I mustn't forget
that."  Then I would try to recollect some of the gossip I had heard
at the club; the prices of So-and-So's horses--anything, in fact,
that related to the workaday Anglo-Indian world I knew so well.  I
even repeated the multiplication table rapidly to myself, to make
quite sure that I was not taking leave of my senses.  It gave me much
comfort; and must have prevented my hearing Mrs. Wessington for a
time.

Once more I wearily climbed the convent slope and entered the level
road.  Here Kitty and the man started off at a canter, and I was left
alone with Mrs. Wessington.  "Agnes," said I, "will you put back your
hood and tell me what it all means?"  The hood dropped noiselessly,
and I was face to face with my dead and buried mistress.  She was
wearing the dress in which I had last seen her alive; carried the
same tiny handkerchief in her right hand, and the same card-case in
her left.  (A woman eight months dead with a card-case!)  I had to
pin myself down to the multiplication table, and to set both hands on
the stone parapet of the road, to assure myself that at least was
real.

"Agnes," I repeated, "for pity's sake tell me what it all means."
Mrs. Wessington leaned forward, with that odd, quick turn of the head
I used to know so well, and spoke.

If my story had not already so madly overleaped the bounds of all
human belief I should apologize to you now.  As I know that no
one--no, not even Kitty, for whom it is written as some sort of
justification of my conduct--will believe me, I will go on.  Mrs.
Wessington spoke and I walked with her from the Sanjowlie road to the
turning below the Commander-in-chief's house as I might walk by the
side of any living woman's 'rickshaw, deep in conversation.  The
second and most tormenting of my moods of sickness had suddenly laid
hold upon me, and, like the prince in Tennyson's poem, "I seemed to
move amid a world of ghosts."  There had been a garden-party at the
commander-in-chief's, and we two joined the crowd of homeward-bound
folk.  As I saw them then it seemed that they were the
shadows--impalpable fantastic shadows--that divided for Mrs.
Wessington's 'rickshaw to pass through.  What we said during the
course of that weird interview I can not--indeed, I dare not--tell.
Heatherlegh's comment would have been a short laugh and a remark that
I had been "mashing a brain-eye-and-stomach chimera."  It was a
ghastly and yet in some indefinable way a marvelously dear
experience.  Could it be possible, I wondered, that I was in this
life to woo a second time the woman I had killed by my own neglect
and cruelty?

I met Kitty on the homeward road--a shadow among shadows.

If I were to describe all the incidents of the next fortnight in
their order, my story would never come to an end; and your patience
would be exhausted.  Morning after morning and evening after evening
the ghostly 'rickshaw and I used to wander through Simla together.
Wherever I went there the four black and white liveries followed me
and bore me company to and from my hotel.  At the theatre I found
them amid the crowd of yelling jhampanies; outside the club veranda,
after a long evening of whist; at the birthday ball, waiting
patiently for my reappearance; and in broad daylight when I went
calling.  Save that it cast no shadow, the 'rickshaw was in every
respect as real to look upon as one of wood and iron.  More than
once, indeed, I have had to check myself from warning some
hard-riding friend against cantering over it.  More than once I have
walked down the Mall deep in conversation with Mrs. Wessington to the
unspeakable amazement of the passers-by.

Before I had been out and about a week I learned that the "fit"
theory had been discarded in favor of insanity.  However, I made no
change in my mode of life.  I called, rode, and dined out as freely
as ever.  I had a passion for the society of my kind which I had
never felt before; I hungered to be among the realities of life; and
at the same time I felt vaguely unhappy when I had been separated too
long from my ghostly companion.  It would be almost impossible to
describe my varying moods from the 15th of May up to to-day.

The presence of the 'rickshaw filled me by turns with horror, blind
fear, a dim sort of pleasure, and utter despair.  I dared not leave
Simla; and I knew that my stay there was killing me.  I knew,
moreover, that it was my destiny to die slowly and a little every
day.  My only anxiety was to get the penance over as quietly as might
be.  Alternately I hungered for a sight of Kitty and watched her
outrageous flirtations with my successor--to speak more accurately,
my successors--with amused interest.  She was as much out of my life
as I was out of hers.  By day I wandered with Mrs. Wessington almost
content.  By night I implored Heaven to let me return to the world as
I used to know it.

Above all these varying moods lay the sensation of dull, numbing
wonder that the Seen and the Unseen should mingle so strangely on
this earth to hound one poor soul to its grave.

. . . . . . . . . . .

August 27.--Heatherlegh has been indefatigable in his attendance on
me; and only yesterday told me that I ought to send in an application
for sick leave.  An application to escape the company of a phantom!
A request that the government would graciously permit me to get rid
of five ghosts and an airy 'rickshaw by going to England!
Heatherlegh's proposition moved me to almost hysterical laughter.  I
told him that I should await the end quietly at Simla; and I am sure
that the end is not far off.  Believe me that I dread its advent more
than any word can say; and I torture myself nightly with a thousand
speculations as to the manner of my death.

Shall I die in my bed decently and as an English gentleman should
die; or, in one last walk on the Mall, will my soul be wrenched from
me to take its place forever and ever by the side of that ghastly
phantasm?  Shall I return to my old lost allegiance in the next
world, or shall I meet Agnes, loathing her and bound to her side
through all eternity?  Shall we two hover over the scene of our lives
till the end of Time?  As the day of my death draws nearer, the
intense horror that all living flesh feels toward escaped spirits
from beyond the grave grows more and more powerful.  It is an awful
thing to go down quick among the dead with scarcely one-half of your
life completed.  It is a thousand times more awful to wait as I do in
your midst, for I know not what unimaginable terror.  Pity me, at
least on the score of my "delusion," for I know you will never
believe what I have written here.  Yet as surely as ever a man was
done to death by the Powers of Darkness I am that man.

In justice, too, pity her.  For as surely as ever woman was killed by
man, I killed Mrs. Wessington.  And the last portion of my punishment
is even now upon me.




THE ROLL-CALL OF THE REEF

BY A. T. QUILLER-COUCH ("Q.")

_"Q." is the signature of Arthur Thomas Quiller-Couch, born in
Cornwall in 1863.  No English novelist of the present generation
upholds more evenly and consistently than he the best traditions of
the art of story-writing, both in elevation of theme and dignity of
style.  His imagination attains the dramatic quality by strength and
purity rather than by eccentricity and abnormality.  For these
reasons he was chosen to complete Robert Louis Stevenson's novel "St.
Ives," left unfinished on the death of the author._



THE ROLL-CALL OF THE REEF

By A. T. QUILLER-COUCH

"Yes, sir," said my host, the quarryman, reaching down the relics
from their hook in the wall over the chimneypiece; "they've hung here
all my time, and most of my father's.  The women won't touch 'em;
they're afraid of the story.  So here they'll dangle, and gather dust
and smoke, till another tenant comes and tosses 'em out o' doors for
rubbish.  Whew! 'tis coarse weather, surely."

He went to the door, opened it, and stood studying the gale that beat
upon his cottage-front, straight from the Manacle Reef.  The rain
drove past him into the kitchen, aslant like threads of gold silk in
the shine of the wreck-wood fire.  Meanwhile, by the same firelight,
I examined the relics on my knee.  The metal of each was tarnished
out of knowledge.  But the trumpet was evidently an old cavalry
trumpet, and the threads of its party-colored sling, though fretted
and dusty, still hung together.  Around the side-drum, beneath its
cracked brown varnish, I could hardly trace a royal coat-of-arms and
a legend running, "Per Mare Per Terram"--the motto of the marines.
Its parchment, though black and scented with wood-smoke, was limp and
mildewed; and I began to tighten up the straps--under which the
drumsticks had been loosely thrust--with the idle purpose of trying
if some music might be got out of the old drum yet.

But as I turned it on my knee, I found the drum attached to the
trumpet-sling by a curious barrel-shaped padlock, and paused to
examine this.  The body of the lock was composed of half a dozen
brass rings, set accurately edge to edge; and, rubbing the brass with
my thumb, I saw that each of the six had a series of letters engraved
around it.

I knew the trick of it, I thought.  Here was one of those word
padlocks, once so common; only to be opened by getting the rings to
spell a certain word, which the dealer confides to you.

My host shut and barred the door, and came back to the hearth.

"'Twas just such a wind--east by south--that brought in what you've
got between your hands.  Back in the year 'nine, it was; my father
has told me the tale a score o' times.  You're twisting round the
rings, I see.  But you'll never guess the word.  Parson Kendall, he
made the word, and he locked down a couple o' ghosts in their graves
with it; and when his time came he went to his own grave and took the
word with him."

"Whose ghosts, Matthew?"

"You want the story, I see, sir.  My father could tell it better than
I can.  He was a young man in the year 'nine, unmarried at the time,
and living in this very cottage, just as I be.  That's how he came to
get mixed up with the tale."

He took a chair, lighted a short pipe, and went on, with his eyes
fixed on the dancing violet flames:

"Yes, he'd ha' been about thirty year old in January, eighteen 'nine.
The storm got up in the night o' the twenty-first o' that month.  My
father was dressed and out long before daylight; he never was one to
bide in bed, let be that the gale by this time was pretty near
lifting the thatch over his head.  Besides which, he'd fenced a small
'taty-patch that winter, down by Lowland Point, and he wanted to see
if it stood the night's work.  He took the path across Gunner's
Meadow--where they buried most of the bodies afterward.  The wind was
right in his teeth at the time, and once on the way (he's told me
this often) a great strip of oarweed came flying through the darkness
and fetched him a slap on the cheek like a cold hand.  But he made
shift pretty well till he got to Lowland, and then had to drop upon
hands and knees and crawl, digging his fingers every now and then
into the shingle to hold on, for he declared to me that the stones,
some of them as big as a man's head, kept rolling and driving past
till it seemed the whole foreshore was moving westward under him.
The fence was gone, of course; not a stick left to show where it
stood; so that, when first he came to the place, he thought he must
have missed his bearings.  My father, sir, was a very religious man;
and if he reckoned the end of the world was at hand--there in the
great wind and night, among the moving stones--you may believe he was
certain of it when he heard a gun fired, and, with the same, saw a
flame shoot up out of the darkness to windward, making a sudden
fierce light in all the place about.  All he could find to think or
say was, 'The Second Coming!  The Second Coming!  The Bridegroom
cometh, and the wicked He will toss like a ball into a large
country'; and being already upon his knees, he just bowed his head
and 'bided, saying this over and over.

"But by'm by, between two squalls, he made bold to lift his head and
look, and then by the light--a bluish color 'twas--he saw all the
coast clear away to Manacle Point, and off the Manacles in the thick
of the weather, a sloop-of-war with topgallants housed, driving stern
foremost toward the reef.  It was she, of course, that was burning
the flare.  My father could see the white streak and the ports of her
quite plain as she rose to it, a little outside the breakers, and he
guessed easy enough that her captain had just managed to wear ship
and was trying to force her nose to the sea with the help of her
small bower anchor and the scrap or two of canvas that hadn't yet
been blown out of her.  But while he looked, she fell off, giving her
broadside to it foot by foot, and drifting back on the breakers
around Carn Du and the Varses.  The rocks lie so thick thereabout
that 'twas a toss up which she struck first; at any rate, my father
couldn't tell at the time, for just then the flare died down and went
out.

"Well, sir, he turned then in the dark and started back for Coverack
to cry the dismal tidings--though well knowing ship and crew to be
past any hope, and as he turned the wind lifted him and tossed him
forward 'like a ball,' as he'd been saying, and homeward along the
foreshore.  As you know, 'tis ugly work, even by daylight, picking
your way among the stones there, and my father was prettily knocked
about at first in the dark.  But by this 'twas nearer seven than six
o'clock, and the day spreading.  By the time he reached North Corner,
a man could see to read print; hows'ever, he looked neither out to
sea nor toward Coverack, but headed straight for the first
cottage--the same that stands above North Corner to-day.  A man named
Billy Ede lived there then, and when my father burst into the kitchen
bawling, 'Wreck! wreck!' he saw Billy Ede's wife, Ann, standing there
in her clogs with a shawl over her head, and her clothes wringing wet.

"'Save the chap!' says Billy Ede's wife, Ann.  'What d'ee mean by
crying stale fish at that rate?'

"'But 'tis a wreck, I tell 'ee.'

"'I've a-zeed 'n, too; and so has every one with an eye in his head.'

"And with that she pointed straight over my father's shoulder, and he
turned; and there, close under Dolor Point, at the end of Coverack
town, he saw another wreck washing, and the point black with people,
like emmets, running to and fro in the morning light.  While he stood
staring at her, he heard a trumpet sounded on board, the notes coming
in little jerks, like a bird rising against the wind; but faintly, of
course, because of the distance and the gale blowing--though this had
dropped a little.

"'She's a transport,' said Billy Ede's wife, Ann, 'and full of
horse-soldiers, fine long men.  When she struck they must ha' pitched
the horses over first to lighten the ship, for a score of dead horses
had washed in afore I left, half an hour back.  An' three or four
soldiers, too--fine long corpses in white breeches and jackets of
blue and gold.  I held the lantern to one.  Such a straight young
man!'

"My father asked her about the trumpeting.

"'That's the queerest bit of all.  She was burnin' a light when me
an' my man joined the crowd down there.  All her masts had gone;
whether they carried away, or were cut away to ease her, I don't
rightly know.  Her keelson was broke under her and her bottom sagged
and stove, and she had just settled down like a sitting hen--just the
leastest list to starboard; but a man could stand there easy.  They
had rigged up ropes across her, from bulwark to bulwark, an' beside
these the men were mustered, holding on like grim death whenever the
sea made a clean breach over them, an' standing up like heroes as
soon as it passed.  The captain an' the officers were clinging to the
rail of the quarterdeck, all in their golden uniforms, waiting for
the end as if 'twas King George they expected.  There was no way to
help, for she lay right beyond cast of line, though our folk tried it
fifty times.  And beside them clung a trumpeter, a whacking big man,
an' between the heavy seas he would lift his trumpet with one hand,
and blow a call; and every time he blew the men gave a cheer.  There
[she says]--hark 'ee now--there he goes agen!  But you won't hear no
cheering any more, for few are left to cheer, and their voices weak.
Bitter cold the wind is, and I reckon it numbs their grip o' the
ropes, for they were dropping off fast with every sea when my man
sent me home to get his breakfast.  Another wreck, you say?  Well,
there's no hope for the tender dears, if 'tis the Manacles.  You'd
better run down and help yonder; though 'tis little help any man can
give.  Not one came in alive while I was there.  The tide's flowing,
an' she won't hold together another hour, they say.'

"Well, sure enough, the end was coming fast when my father got down
to the point.  Six men had been cast up alive, or just breathing--a
seaman and five troopers.  The seaman was the only one that had
breath to speak; and while they were carrying him into the town, the
word went round that the ship's name was the 'Despatch,' transport,
homeward-bound from Corunna, with a detachment of the Seventh
Hussars, that had been fighting out there with Sir John Moore.  The
seas had rolled her further over by this time, and given her decks a
pretty sharp slope; but a dozen men still held on, seven by the ropes
near the ship's waist, a couple near the break of the poop, and three
on the quarterdeck.  Of these three my father made out one to be the
skipper; close by him clung an officer in full regimentals--his name,
they heard after, was Captain Duncanfield; and last came the tall
trumpeter; and if you'll believe me, the fellow was making shift
there, at the very last, to blow 'God Save the King.'  What's more,
he got to 'Send us victorious,' before an extra big sea came bursting
across and washed them off the deck--every man but one of the pair
beneath the poop--and he dropped his hold before the next wave; being
stunned, I reckon.  The others went out of sight at once, but the
trumpeter--being, as I said, a powerful man as well as a tough
swimmer--rose like a duck, rode out a couple of breakers, and came in
on the crest of the third.  The folks looked to see him broke like an
egg at their very feet; but when the smother cleared, there he was,
lying face downward on a ledge below them; and one of the men that
happened to have a rope round him--I forget the fellow's name, if I
ever heard it--jumped down and grabbed him by the ankle as he began
to slip back.  Before the next big sea, the pair were hauled high
enough to be out of harm, and another heave brought them up to grass.
Quick work, but master trumpeter wasn't quite dead; nothing worse
than a cracked head and three staved ribs.  In twenty minutes or so
they had him in bed, with the doctor to tend him.

"Now was the time--nothing being left alive upon the transport--for
my father to tell of the sloop he'd seen driving upon the Manacles.
And when he got a hearing, though the most were set upon salvage, and
believed a wreck in the hand, so to say, to be worth half a dozen
they couldn't see, a good few volunteered to start off with him and
have a look.  They crossed Lowland Point; no ship to be seen on the
Manacles nor anywhere upon the sea.  One or two was for calling my
father a liar.  'Wait till we come to Dean Point,' said he.  Sure
enough, on the far side of Dean Point they found the sloop's mainmast
washing about with half a dozen men lashed to it, men in red jackets,
every mother's son drowned and staring; and a little further on, just
under the Dean, three or four bodies cast up on the shore, one of
them a small drummer-boy, side-drum and all; and near by part of a
ship's gig, with 'H.M.S. Primrose' cut on the stern-board.  From this
point on the shore was littered thick with wreckage and dead
bodies--the most of them marines in uniform--and in Godrevy Cove, in
particular, a heap of furniture from the captain's cabin, and among
it a water-tight box, not much damaged, and full of papers, by which,
when it came to be examined, next day, the wreck was easily made out
to be the 'Primrose,' of eighteen guns, outward bound from
Portsmouth, with a fleet of transports for the Spanish war--thirty
sail, I've heard, but I've never heard what became of them.  Being
handled by merchant skippers, no doubt they rode out the gale, and
reached the Tagus safe and sound.  Not but what the captain of the
'Primrose'--Mein was his name--did quite right to try and club-haul
his vessel when he found himself under the land; only he never ought
to have got there, if he took proper soundings.  But it's easy
talking.

"The 'Primrose,' sir, was a handsome vessel--for her size one of the
handsomest in the King's service--and newly fitted out at Plymouth
Dock.  So the boys had brave pickings from her in the way of
brass-work, ship's instruments, and the like, let alone some barrels
of stores not much spoiled.  They loaded themselves with as much as
they could carry, and started for home, meaning to make a second
journey before the preventive men got wind of their doings, and came
to spoil the fun.  'Hullo!' says my father, and dropped his gear, 'I
do believe there's a leg moving?' and running fore, he stooped over
the small drummer-boy that I told you about.  The poor little chap
was lying there, with his face a mass of bruises, and his eyes
closed; but he had shifted one leg an inch or two, and was still
breathing.  So my father pulled out a knife, and cut him free from
his drum--that was lashed on to him with a double turn of Manila
rope--and took him up and carried him along here to this very room
that we're sitting in.  He lost a good deal by this; for when he went
back to fetch the bundle he'd dropped, the preventive men had got
hold of it, and were thick as thieves along the foreshore; so that
'twas only by paying one or two to look the other way that he picked
up anything worth carrying off: which you'll allow to be hard, seeing
that he was the first man to give news of the wreck.

"Well, the inquiry was held, of course, and my father gave evidence,
and for the rest they had to trust to the sloop's papers, for not a
soul was saved besides the drummer-boy, and he was raving in a fever,
brought on by the cold and the fright.  And the seaman and the five
troopers gave evidence about the loss of the 'Despatch.'  The tall
trumpeter, too, whose ribs were healing, came forward and kissed the
book; but somehow his head had been hurt in coming ashore, and he
talked foolish-like, and 'twas easy seen he would never be a proper
man again.  The others were taken up to Plymouth, and so went their
ways; but the trumpeter stayed on in Coverack; and King George,
finding he was fit for nothing, sent him down a trifle of a pension
after a while--enough to keep him in board and lodging, with a bit of
tobacco over.

"Now the first time that this man--William Tallifer he called
himself--met with the drummer-boy, was about a fortnight after the
little chap had bettered enough to be allowed a short walk out of
doors, which he took, if you please, in full regimentals.  There
never was a soldier so proud of his dress.  His own suit had shrunk a
brave bit with the salt water; but into ordinary frock an' corduroys
he declared he would not get, not if he had to go naked the rest of
his life; so my father--being a good-natured man, and handy with the
needle--turned to and repaired damages with a piece or two of scarlet
cloth cut from the jacket of one of the drowned Marines.  Well, the
poor little chap chanced to be standing, in this rig out, down by the
gate of Gunner's Meadow, where they had buried two score and over of
his comrades.  The morning was a fine one, early in March month; and
along came the cracked trumpeter, likewise taking a stroll.

"'Hullo!' says he; 'good mornin'!  And what might you be doin' here?'

"'I was a-wishin',' says the boy, 'I had a pair o' drumsticks.  Our
lads were buried yonder without so much as a drum tapped or a musket
fired; and that's not Christian burial for British soldiers.'

"'Phut!' says the trumpeter, and spat on the ground; 'a parcel of
Marines!'

"The boy eyed him a second or so, and answered up: 'If I'd a tav of
turf handy, I'd bung it at your mouth, you greasy cavalryman, and
learn you to speak respectful of your betters.  The Marines are the
handiest body o' men in the service.'

"The trumpeter looked down on him from the height of six-foot two,
and asked: 'Did they die well?'

"'They died very well.  There was a lot of running to and fro at
first, and some of the men began to cry, and a few to strip off their
clothes.  But when the ship fell off for the last time, Captain Mein
turned and said something to Major Griffiths, the commanding officer
on board, and the Major called out to me to beat to quarters.  It
might have been for a wedding, he sang it out so cheerful.  We'd had
word already that 'twas to be parade order; and the men fell in as
trim and decent as if they were going to church.  One or two even
tried to shave at the last moment.  The Major wore his medals.  One
of the seamen, seeing I had work to keep the drum steady--the sling
being a bit loose for me, and the wind what you remember--lashed it
tight with a piece of rope; and that saved my life afterward, a drum
being as good as a cork until it's stove.  I kept beating away until
every man was on deck; and then the Major formed them up and told
them to die like British soldiers, and the chaplain was in the middle
of a prayer when she struck.  In ten minutes she was gone.  That was
how they died, cavalryman.'

"'And that was very well done, drummer of the Marines.  What's your
name?'

"'John Christian.'

"'Mine's William George Tallifer, trumpeter, of the Seventh Light
Dragoons--the Queen's Own.  I played "God Save the King" while our
men were drowning.  Captain Duncanfield told me to sound a call or
two, to put them in heart; but that matter of "God save the King" was
a notion of my own.  I won't say anything to hurt the feelings of a
Marine, even if he's not much over five-foot tall; but the Queen's
Own Hussars is a tearin' fine regiment.  As between horse and foot,
'tis a question o' which gets a chance.  All the way from Sahagun to
Corunna 'twas we that took and gave the knocks--at Mayorga and Rueda,
and Bennyventy.'--The reason, sir, I can speak the names so pat, is
that my father learnt 'em by heart afterward from the trumpeter, who
was always talking about Mayorga and Rueda and Bennyventy.'--We made
the rear-guard, under General Paget; and drove the French every time;
and all the infantry did was to sit about in wine-shops till we
whipped 'em out, an' steal an' straggle an' play the tom-fool in
general.  And when it came to a stand-up fight at Corunna, 'twas we
that had to stay seasick aboard the transports, an' watch the
infantry in the thick o' the caper.  Very well they behaved,
too--specially the Fourth Regiment, an' the Forty-Second Highlanders,
an' the Dirty Half-Hundred.  Oh, ay; they're decent regiments, all
three.  But the Queen's Own Hussars is a tearin' fine regiment.  So
you played on your drum when the ship was goin' down?  Drummer John
Christian, I'll have to get you a new pair of sticks.'

"The very next day the trumpeter marched into Helston, and got a
carpenter there to turn him a pair of box-wood drumsticks for the
boy.  And this was the beginning of one of the most curious
friendships you ever heard tell of.  Nothing delighted the pair more
than to borrow a boat off my father and pull out to the rocks where
the 'Primrose' and the 'Despatch' had struck and sunk; and on still
days 'twas pretty to hear them out there off the Manacles, the
drummer playing his tattoo--for they always took their music with
them--and the trumpeter practising calls, and making his trumpet
speak like an angel.  But if the weather turned roughish, they'd be
walking together and talking; leastwise the youngster listened while
the other discoursed about Sir John's campaign in Spain and Portugal,
telling how each little skirmish befell; and of Sir John himself, and
General Baird, and General Paget, and Colonel Vivian, his own
commanding officer, and what kind of men they were; and of the last
bloody stand-up at Corunna, and so forth, as if neither could have
enough.

"But all this had to come to an end in the late summer, for the boy,
John Christian, being now well and strong again, must go up to
Plymouth to report himself.  'Twas his own wish (for I believe King
George had forgotten all about him), but his friend wouldn't hold him
back.  As for the trumpeter, my father had made an arrangement to
take him on as lodger, as soon as the boy left; and on the morning
fixed for the start, he was up at the door here by five o'clock, with
his trumpet slung by his side, and all the rest of his belongings in
a small valise.  A Monday morning it was, and after breakfast he had
fixed to walk with the boy some way on the road toward Helston, where
the coach started.  My father left them at breakfast together, and
went out to meat the pig, and do a few odd morning jobs of that sort.
When he came back, the boy was still at table, and the trumpeter sat
with the rings in his hands, hitched together just as they be at this
moment.

"'Look at this,' he says to my father, showing him the lock.  'I
picked it up off a starving brass-worker in Lisbon, and it is not one
of your common locks that one word of six letters will open at any
time.  There's janius in this lock; for you've only to make the rings
spell any six-letter word you please and snap down the lock upon
that, and never a soul can open it--not the maker, even--until
somebody comes along that knows the word you snapped it on.  Now
Johnny here's goin', and he leaves his drum behind him; for, though
he can make pretty music on it, the parchment sags in wet weather, by
reason of the sea-water getting at it; an' if he carries it to
Plymouth, they'll only condemn it and give him another.  And, as for
me, I shan't have the heart to put lip to the trumpet any more when
Johnny's gone.  So we've chosen a word together, and locked 'em
together upon that; and, by your leave, I'll hang 'em here together
on the hook over your fireplace.  Maybe Johnny'll come back; maybe
not.  Maybe, if he comes, I'll be dead an' gone, and he'll take 'em
apart an' try their music for old sake's sake.  But if he never
comes, nobody can separate 'em; for nobody besides knows the word.
And if you marry and have sons, you can tell 'em that here are tied
together the souls of Johnny Christian, drummer of the Marines, and
William George Tallifer, once trumpeter of the Queen's Own Hussars.
Amen.'

"With that he hung the two instruments 'pon the hook there; and the
boy stood up and thanked my father and shook hands; and the pair went
out of the door, toward Helston.

"Somewhere on the road they took leave of one another; but nobody saw
the parting, nor heard what was said between them.  About three in
the afternoon the trumpeter came walking back over the hill; and by
the time my father came home from the fishing, the cottage was tidied
up, and the tea ready, and the whole place shining like a new pin.
From that time for five years he lodged here with my father, looking
after the house and tilling the garden.  And all the while he was
steadily failing; the hurt in his head spreading, in a manner, to his
limbs.  My father watched the feebleness growing on him, but said
nothing.  And from first to last neither spake a word about the
drummer, John Christian; nor did any letter reach them, nor word of
his doings.

"The rest of the tale you're free to believe, sir, or not, as you
please.  It stands upon my father's words, and he always declared he
was ready to kiss the Book upon it, before judge and jury.  He said,
too, that he never had the wit to make up such a yarn; and he defied
any one to explain about the lock, in particular, by any other tale.
But you shall judge for yourself.

"My father said that about three o'clock in the morning, April
fourteenth, of the year 'fourteen, he and William Tallifer were
sitting here, just as you and I, sir, are sitting now.  My father had
put on his clothes a few minutes before, and was mending his spiller
by the light of the horn lantern, meaning to set off before daylight
to haul the trammel.  The trumpeter hadn't been to bed at all.
Toward the last he mostly spent his nights (and his days, too) dozing
in the elbow-chair where you sit at this minute.  He was dozing then
(my father said) with his chin dropped forward on his chest, when a
knock sounded upon the door, and the door opened, and in walked an
upright young man in scarlet regimentals.

"He had grown a brave bit, and his face the color of wood-ashes; but
it was the drummer, John Christian.  Only his uniform was different
from the one he used to wear, and the figures '38' shone in brass
upon his collar.

"The drummer walked past my father as if he never saw him, and stood
by the elbow-chair and said:

"'Trumpeter, trumpeter, are you one with us?'

"And the trumpeter just lifted the lids of his eyes, and answered:
'How should I not be one with you, drummer Johnny--Johnny boy?  If
you come, I count; if you march, I mark time; until the discharge
comes.'

"'The discharge has come to-night,' said the drummer; 'and the word
is Corunna no longer.' And stepping to the chimney-place, he unhooked
the drum and trumpet, and began to twist the brass rings of the lock,
spelling the word aloud, so--'C-O-R-U-N-A.'  When he had fixed the
last letter, the padlock opened in his hand.

"'Did you know, trumpeter, that, when I came to Plymouth, they put me
into a line regiment?'

"'The 38th is a good regiment,' answered the old Hussar, still in his
dull voice; 'I went back with them from Sahagun to Corunna.  At
Corunna they stood in General Fraser's division, on the right.  They
behaved well."

"'But I'd fain see the Marines again,' says the drummer, handing him
the trumpet; 'and you, you shall call once more for the Queen's Own.
Matthew,' he says, suddenly, turning on my father--and when he
turned, my father saw for the first time that his scarlet jacket had
a round hole by the breast-bone, and that the blood was welling
there--'Matthew, we shall want your boat.'

"Then my father rose on his legs like a man in a dream, while they
two slung on, the one his drum, and t'other his trumpet.  He took the
lantern and went quaking before them down to the shore, and they
breathed heavily behind him; and they stepped into his boat, and my
father pushed off.

"'Row you first for Dolor Point,' says the drummer.  So my father
rowed them past the white houses of Coverack to Dolor Point, and
there, at a word, lay on his oars.  And the trumpeter, William
Tallifer, put his trumpet to his mouth and sounded the reveille.  The
music of it was like rivers running.

"'They will follow,' said the drummer.  'Matthew, pull you now for
the Manacles.'

"So my father pulled for the Manacles, and came to an easy close
outside Carn Du.  And the drummer took his sticks and beat a tattoo,
there by the edge of the reef; and the music of it was like a rolling
chariot.

"'That will do,' says he, breaking off; 'they will follow.  Pull now
for the shore under Gunner's Meadow.'

"Then my father pulled for the shore and ran his boat in under
Gunner's Meadow.  And they stepped out, all three, and walked up to
the meadow.  By the gate the drummer halted, and began his tattoo
again, looking out toward the darkness over the sea.

"And while the drum beat, and my father held his breath, there came
up out of the sea and the darkness a troop of many men, horse and
foot, and formed up among the graves; and others rose out of the
graves and formed up--drowned Marines with bleached faces, and pale
Hussars, riding their horses, all lean and shadowy.  There was no
clatter of hoofs or accoutrements, my father said, but a soft sound
all the while like the beating of a bird's wing; and a black shadow
lay like a pool about the feet of all.  The drummer stood upon a
little knoll just inside the gate, and beside him the tall trumpeter,
with hand on hip, watching them gather; and behind them both my
father, clinging to the gate.  When no more came, the drummer stopped
playing, and said, 'Call the roll.'

"Then the trumpeter stepped toward the end man of the rank and
called, 'Troop Sergeant-Major Thomas Irons,' and the man answered in
a thin voice, 'Here.'

"'Troop Sergeant-Major Thomas Irons, how is it with you?'

"The man answered, 'How should it be with me?  When I was young, I
betrayed a girl; and when I was grown, I betrayed a friend, and for
these I must pay.  But I died as a man ought.  God save the King!'

"The trumpeter called to the next man, 'Trooper Henry Buckingham,'
and the next man answered, 'Here.'

"'Trooper Henry Buckingham, how is it with you?'

"'How should it be with me?  I was a drunkard, and I stole, and in
Lugo, in a wine-shop, I killed a man.  But I died as a man should.
God save the King!'

"So the trumpeter went down the line; and when he had finished, the
drummer took it up, hailing the dead Marines in their order.  Each
man answered to his name, and each man ended with 'God save the
King!'  When all were hailed, the drummer stepped back to his mound,
and called:

"'It is well.  You are content, and we are content to join you.
Wait, now, a little while.'

"With this he turned and ordered my father to pick up the lantern,
and lead the way back.  As my father picked it up, he heard the ranks
of the dead men cheer and call, 'God save the King!' all together,
and saw them waver and fade back into the dark, like a breath fading
off a pane.

"But when they came back here to the kitchen, and my father set the
lantern down, it seemed they'd both forgot about him.  For the
drummer turned in the lantern-light--and my father could see the
blood still welling out of the hole in his breast--and took the
trumpet-sling from around the other's neck, and locked drum and
trumpet together again, choosing the letters on the lock very
carefully.  While he did this, he said:

"'The word is no more Corunna, but Bayonne.  As you left out an "n"
in Corunna, so must I leave out an "n" in Bayonne.' And before
snapping the padlock, he spelt out the word slowly--'B-A-Y-O-N-E.'
After that, he used no more speech; but turned and hung the two
instruments back on the hook; and then took the trumpeter by the arm;
and the pair walked out into the darkness, glancing neither to right
nor left.

"My father was on the point of following, when he heard a sort of
sigh behind him; and there, sitting in the elbow-chair, was the very
trumpeter he had just seen walk out by the door!  If my father's
heart jumped before, you may believe it jumped quicker now.  But
after a bit, he went up to the man asleep in the chair and put a hand
upon him.  It was the trumpeter in flesh and blood that he touched;
but though the flesh was warm, the trumpeter was dead.

"Well, sir, they buried him three days after; and at first my father
was minded to say nothing about his dream (as he thought it).  But
the day after the funeral, he met Parson Kendall coming from Helston
market; and the parson called out: 'Have 'ee heard the news the coach
brought down this mornin'?'  'What news?' says my father.  'Why, that
peace is agreed upon.'  'None too soon,' says my father.  'Not soon
enough for our poor lads at Bayonne,' the parson answered.
'Bayonne!' cries my father, with a jump.  'Why, yes;' and the parson
told him all about a great sally the French had made on the night of
April 13th.  'Do you happen to know if the 38th Regiment was
engaged?' my father asked.  'Come, now,' said Parson Kendall, 'I
didn't know you was so well up in the campaign.  But, as it happens,
I do know that the 38th was engaged, for 'twas they that held a
cottage and stopped the French advance.'

"Still my father held his tongue; and when, a week later, he walked
into Helston and bought a 'Mercury' off the Sherborne rider, and got
the landlord of the 'Angel' to spell out the list of killed and
wounded, sure enough, there among the killed was Drummer John
Christian, of the 38th Foot.

"After this there was nothing for a religious man but to make a clean
breast.  So my father went up to Parson Kendall, and told the whole
story.  The parson listened, and put a question or two, and then
asked:

"'Have you tried to open the lock since that night?'

"'I haven't dared to touch it,' says my father.

"'Then come along and try.'  When the parson came to the cottage
here, he took the things off the hook and tried the lock.  'Did he
say "Bayonne?"  The word has seven letters.'

"'Not if you spell it with one "n" as he did,' says my father.

"The parson spelt it out--'B-A-Y-O-N-E.'  'Whew!' says he, for the
lock had fallen open in his hand.

"He stood considering it a moment, and then he says: 'I tell you
what.  I shouldn't blab this all round the parish, if I was you.  You
won't get no credit for truth-telling, and a miracle's wasted on a
set of fools.  But if you like, I'll shut down the lock again upon a
holy word that no one but me shall know, and neither drummer nor
trumpeter, dead or alive, shall frighten the secret out of me.'

"'I wish to heaven you would, parson,' said my father.

"The parson chose the holy word there and then, and shut the lock
back upon it, and hung the drum and trumpet back in their place.  He
is gone long since, taking the word with him.  And till the lock is
broken by force, nobody will ever separate those two."




THE HOUSE AND THE BRAIN

BY LORD EDWARD BULWER-LYTTON

_Edward George Earle Lytton Bulwer, Baron Lytton (born 1803, died
1873), was an extremely accomplished and versatile man.  He was a
statesman, orator, social reformer, playwright, poet, novelist (he
wrote more than fifty volumes of fiction), and short story writer.
In the latter capacity he produced a number of imaginative tales that
in their weird fantasy have been favorably compared with the work of
Edgar Allan Poe.  Of these the present story is the most noted._



THE HOUSE AND THE BRAIN

By LORD EDWARD BULWER-LYTTON

A friend of mine, who is a man of letters and a philosopher, said to
me one day, as if between jest and earnest: "Fancy! since we last
met, I have discovered a haunted house in the midst of London."

"Really haunted?--and by what?--ghosts?"

"Well, I can't answer that question; all I know is this: six weeks
ago my wife and I were in search of a furnished apartment.  Passing a
quiet street, we saw on the window of one of the houses a bill,
'Apartments, Furnished.'  The situation suited us: we entered the
house--liked the rooms--engaged them by the week--and left them the
third day.  No power on earth could have reconciled my wife to stay
longer; and I don't wonder at it."

"What did you see?"

"Excuse me--I have no desire to be ridiculed as a superstitious
dreamer--nor, on the other hand, could I ask you to accept on my
affirmation what you would hold to be incredible without the evidence
of your own senses.  Let me only say this, it was not so much what we
saw or heard (in which you might fairly suppose that we were the
dupes of our own excited fancy, or the victims of imposture in
others) that drove us away, as it was an undefinable terror which
seized both of us whenever we passed by the door of a certain
unfurnished room, in which we neither saw nor heard anything.  And
the strangest marvel of all was, that for once in my life I agreed
with my wife, silly woman though she be--and allowed, after the third
night, that it was impossible to stay a fourth in that house.
Accordingly, on the fourth morning I summoned the woman who kept the
house and attended on us, and told her that the rooms did not quite
suit us, and we would not stay out our week.  She said, dryly: 'I
know why; you have stayed longer than any other lodger.  Few ever
stayed a second night; none before you a third.  But I take it they
have been very kind to you."

"'They--who?' I asked, affecting to smile.

"'Why, they who haunt the house, whoever they are.  I don't mind
them; I remember them many years ago, when I lived in this house, not
as a servant; but I know they will be the death of me some day.  I
don't care--I'm old, and must die soon anyhow; and then I shall be
with them, and in this house still.'  The woman spoke with so dreary
a calmness that really it was a sort of awe that prevented my
conversing with her further.  I paid for my week, and too happy were
my wife and I to get off so cheaply."

"You excite my curiosity," said I; "nothing I should like better than
to sleep in a haunted house.  Pray give me the address of the one
which you left so ignominiously."

My friend gave me the address; and when we parted, I walked straight
toward the house thus indicated.

It is situated on the north side of Oxford Street, in a dull but
respectable thoroughfare.  I found the house shut up--no bill at the
window, and no response to my knock.  As I was turning away, a
beer-boy, collecting pewter pots at the neighboring areas, said to
me, "Do you want any one at that house, sir?"

"Yes, I heard it was to be let."

"Let!--why, the woman who kept it is dead--has been dead these three
weeks, and no one can be found to stay there, though Mr. J----
offered ever so much.  He offered mother, who chars for him, a pound
a week just to open and shut the windows, and she would not."

"Would not!--and why?"

"The house is haunted; and the old woman who kept it was found dead
in her bed, with her eyes wide open.  They say the devil strangled
her."

"Pooh!--you speak of Mr. J----.  Is he the owner of the house?"

"Yes."

"Where does he live?"

"In G---- Street, No. --."

"What is he?--in any business?"

"No, sir--nothing particular; a single gentleman."

I gave the pot-boy the gratuity earned by his liberal information,
and proceeded to Mr. J----, in G---- Street, which was close by the
street that boasted the haunted house.  I was lucky enough to find
Mr. J---- at home--an elderly man, with intelligent countenance and
prepossessing manners.

I communicated my name and my business frankly.  I said I heard the
house was considered to be haunted--that I had a strong desire to
examine a house with so equivocal a reputation--that I should be
greatly obliged if he would allow me to hire it, though only for a
night.  I was willing to pay for that privilege whatever he might be
inclined to ask.  "Sir," said Mr. J----, with great courtesy, "the
house is at your service, for as short or as long a time as you
please.  Rent is out of the question--the obligation will be on my
side should you be able to discover the cause of the strange
phenomena which at present deprive it of all value.  I can not let
it, for I can not even get a servant to keep it in order or answer
the door.  Unluckily the house is haunted, if I may use that
expression, not only by night, but by day; though at night the
disturbances are of a more unpleasant and sometimes of a more
alarming character.  The poor old woman who died in it three weeks
ago was a pauper whom I took out of a workhouse, for in her childhood
she had been known to some of my family, and had once been in such
good circumstances that she had rented that house of my uncle.  She
was a woman of superior education and strong mind, and was the only
person I could ever induce to remain in the house.  Indeed, since her
death, which was sudden, and the coroner's inquest, which gave it a
notoriety in the neighborhood, I have so despaired of finding any
person to take charge of the house, much more a tenant, that I would
willingly let it rent free for a year to any one who would pay its
rates and taxes."

"How long is it since the house acquired this sinister character?"

"That I can scarcely tell you, but very many years since.  The old
woman I spoke of said it was haunted when she rented it between
thirty and forty years ago.  The fact is, that my life has been spent
in the East Indies, and in the civil service of the Company.  I
returned to England last year, on inheriting the fortune of an uncle,
among whose possessions was the house in question.  I found it shut
up and uninhabited.  I was told that it was haunted, that no one
would inhabit it.  I smiled at what seemed to me so idle a story.  I
spent some money in repairing it--added to its old-fashioned
furniture a few modern articles--advertised it, and obtained a lodger
for a year.  He was a colonel on half-pay.  He came in with his
family, a son and a daughter, and four or five servants: they all
left the house the next day; and, although each of them declared that
he had seen something different from that which had scared the
others, a something still was equally terrible to all.  I really
could not in conscience sue, nor even blame, the colonel for breach
of agreement.  Then I put in the old woman I have spoken of, and she
was empowered to let the house in apartments.  I never had one lodger
who stayed more than three days.  I do not tell you their stories--to
no two lodgers have there been exactly the same phenomena repeated.
It is better that you should judge for yourself than enter the house
with an imagination influenced by previous narratives; only be
prepared to see and to hear something or other, and take whatever
precautions you yourself please."

"Have you never had a curiosity yourself to pass a night in that
house?"

"Yes.  I passed not a night, but three hours in broad daylight alone
in that house.  My curiosity is not satisfied, but it is quenched.  I
have no desire to renew the experiment.  You can not complain, you
see, sir, that I am not sufficiently candid; and unless your interest
be exceedingly eager and your nerves unusually strong, I honestly
add, that I advise you not to pass a night in that house."

"My interest is exceedingly keen," said I, "and though only a coward
will boast of his nerves in situations wholly unfamiliar to him, yet
my nerves have been seasoned in such variety of danger that I have
the right to rely on them--even in a haunted house."

Mr. J---- said very little more; he took the keys of the house out of
his bureau, gave them to me--and, thanking him cordially for his
frankness, and his urbane concession to my wish, I carried off my
prize.

Impatient for the experiment, as soon as I reached home, I summoned
my confidential servant--a young man of gay spirits, fearless temper,
and as free from superstitious prejudice as any one I could think of.

"F----," said I, "you remember in Germany how disappointed we were at
not finding a ghost in that old castle, which was said to be haunted
by a headless apparition?  Well, I have heard of a house in London
which, I have reason to hope, is decidedly haunted.  I mean to sleep
there to-night.  From what I hear, there is no doubt that something
will allow itself to be seen or to be heard--something, perhaps,
excessively horrible.  Do you think, if I take you with me, I may
rely on your presence of mind, whatever may happen?"

"Oh, sir! pray trust me," answered F----, grinning with delight.

"Very well; then here are the keys of the house--this is the address.
Go now--select for me any bedroom you please; and since the house has
not been inhabited for weeks, make up a good fire--air the bed
well--see, of course, that there are candles as well as fuel.  Take
with you my revolver and my dagger--so much for my weapons--arm
yourself equally well; and if we are not a match for a dozen ghosts,
we shall be but a sorry couple of Englishmen."

I was engaged for the rest of the day on business so urgent that had
not leisure to think much on the nocturnal adventure to which I had
plighted my honor.  I dined alone, and very late, and while dining,
read, as is my habit.  I selected one of the volumes of Macaulay's
essays.  I thought to myself that I would take the book with me;
there was so much of healthfulness in the style, and practical life
in the subjects, that it would serve as an antidote against the
influences of superstitious fancy.

Accordingly, about half-past nine, I put the book into my pocket, and
strolled leisurely toward the haunted house.  I took with me a
favorite dog--an exceedingly sharp, bold, and vigilant
bull-terrier--a dog fond of prowling about strange ghostly corners
and passages at night in search of rats--a dog of dogs for a ghost.

It was a summer night, but chilly, the sky somewhat gloomy and
overcast.  Still there was a moon--faint and sickly, but still a
moon--and, if the clouds permitted, after midnight it would be
brighter.

I reached the house, knocked, and my servant opened with a cheerful
smile.

"All right, sir, and very comfortable."

"Oh!" said I, rather disappointed; "have you not seen nor heard
anything remarkable?"

"Well, sir, I must own I have heard something queer."

"What?--what?"

"The sound of feet pattering behind me; and once or twice small
noises like whispers close at my ear--nothing more."

"You are not at all frightened?"

"I! not a bit of it, sir;" and the man's bold look reassured me on
one point--viz.: that happen what might, he would not desert me.

We were in the hall, the street-door closed, and my attention was now
drawn to my dog.  He had at first run in eagerly enough, but had
sneaked back to the door, and was scratching and whining to get out.
After patting him on the head, and encouraging him gently, the dog
seemed to reconcile himself to the situation, and followed me and
F---- through the house, but keeping close at my heels instead of
hurrying inquisitively in advance, which was his usual and normal
habit in all strange places.  We first visited the subterranean
apartments, the kitchen, and other offices, and especially the
cellars, in which last there were two or three bottles of wine still
left in a bin, covered with cobwebs, and evidently, by their
appearance, undisturbed for many years.  It was clear that the ghosts
were not wine-bibbers.  For the rest we discovered nothing of
interest.  There was a gloomy little back-yard, with very high walls.
The stones of this yard were very damp; and what with the damp, and
what with the dust and smoke-grime on the pavement, our feet left a
slight impression where we passed.  And now appeared the first
strange phenomenon witnessed by myself in this strange abode.  I saw,
just before me, the print of a foot suddenly form itself, as it were.
I stopped, caught hold of my servant, and pointed to it.  In advance
of that footprint as suddenly dropped another.  We both saw it.  I
advanced quickly to the place; the footprint kept advancing before
me, a small footprint--the foot of a child: the impression was too
faint thoroughly to distinguish the shape, but it seemed to us both
that it was the print of a naked foot.

This phenomenon ceased when we arrived at the opposite wall, nor did
it repeat itself on returning.  We remounted the stairs, and entered
the rooms on the ground floor, a dining-parlor, a small back-parlor,
and a still smaller third room that had been probably appropriated to
a footman--all still as death.  We then visited the drawing-rooms,
which seemed fresh and new.  In the front room I seated myself in an
armchair.  F---- placed on the table the candlestick with which he
had lighted us.  I told him to shut the door.  As he turned to do so,
a chair opposite to me moved from the wall quickly and noiselessly,
and dropped itself about a yard from my own chair, immediately
fronting it.

"Why, this is better than the turning-tables," said I, with a
half-laugh; and as I laughed, my dog put back his head and howled.

F----, coming back, had not observed the movement of the chair.  He
employed himself now in stilling the dog.  I continued to gaze on the
chair, and fancied I saw on it a pale blue misty outline of a human
figure, but an outline so indistinct that I could only distrust my
own vision.  The dog was now quiet.

"Put back that chair opposite to me," said I to F----; "put it back
to the wall."

F---- obeyed.  "Was that you, sir?" said he, turning abruptly.

"I!--what?"

"Why, something struck me.  I felt it sharply on the shoulder--just
here."

"No," said I.  "But we have jugglers present, and though we may not
discover their tricks, we shall catch them before they frighten us."

We did not stay long in the drawing-rooms--in fact, they felt so damp
and so chilly that I was glad to get to the fire upstairs.  We locked
the doors of the drawing-rooms--a precaution which, I should observe,
we had taken with all the rooms we had searched below.  The bedroom
my servant had selected for me was the best on the floor--a large
one, with two windows fronting the street.  The four-posted bed,
which took up no inconsiderable space, was opposite to the fire,
which burnt clear and bright; a door in the wall to the left, between
the bed and the window, communicated with the room which my servant
appropriated to himself.  This last was a small room with a sofa-bed,
and had no communication with the landing-place--no other door but
that which conducted to the bedroom I was to occupy.  On either side
of my fireplace was a cupboard, without locks, flush with the wall,
and covered with the same dull-brown paper.  We examined these
cupboards--only hooks to suspend female dresses--nothing else; we
sounded the walls--evidently solid--the outer walls of the building.
Having finished the survey of these apartments, warmed myself a few
moments, and lighted my cigar, I then, still accompanied by F----,
went forth to complete my reconnoitre.  In the landing-place there
was another door; it was closed firmly.  "Sir," said my servant, in
surprise, "I unlocked this door with all the others when I first
came; it can not have got locked from the inside, for--"

Before he had finished his sentence, the door, which neither of us
then was touching, opened quietly of itself.  We looked at each other
a single instant.  The same thought seized both--some human agency
might be detected here.  I rushed in first, my servant followed.  A
small blank dreary room without furniture--a few empty boxes and
hampers in a corner--a small window--the shutters closed--not even a
fireplace--no other door but that by which we had entered--no carpet
on the floor, and the floor seemed very old, uneven, worm-eaten,
mended here and there, as was shown by the whiter patches on the
wood; but no living being, and no visible place in which a living
being could have hidden.  As we stood gazing round, the door by which
we had entered closed as quietly as it had before opened: we were
imprisoned.

For the first time I felt a creep of undefinable horror.  Not so my
servant.  "Why, they don't think to trap us, sir; I could break that
trumpery door with a kick of my foot."

"Try first if it will open to your hand," said I, shaking off the
vague apprehension that had seized me, "while I unclose the shutters
and see what is without."

I unbarred the shutters--the window looked on the little back-yard I
have before described; there was no ledge without--nothing to break
the sheer descent of the wall.  No man getting out of that window
would have found any footing till he had fallen on the stones below.

F----, meanwhile, was vainly attempting to open the door.  He now
turned round to me and asked my permission to use force.  And I
should here state, in justice to the servant, that, far from evincing
any superstitious terrors, his nerve, composure, and even gaiety amid
circumstances so extraordinary, compelled my admiration, and made me
congratulate myself on having secured a companion in every way fitted
to the occasion.  I willingly gave him the permission he required.
But though he was a remarkably strong man, his force was as idle as
his milder efforts; the door did not even shake to his stoutest kick.
Breathless and panting, he desisted.  I then tried the door myself,
equally in vain.  As I ceased from the effort, again that creep of
horror came over me; but this time it was more cold and stubborn.  I
felt as if some strange and ghastly exhalation were rising up from
the chinks of that rugged floor, and filling the atmosphere with a
venomous influence hostile to human life.  The door now very slowly
and quietly opened as of its own accord.  We precipitated ourselves
into the landing-place.  We both saw a large pale light--as large as
the human figure, but shapeless and unsubstantial--move before us,
and ascend the stairs that led from the landing into the attic.  I
followed the light, and my servant followed me.  It entered to the
right of the landing, a small garret, of which the door stood open.
I entered in the same instant.  The light then collapsed into a small
globule, exceedingly brilliant and vivid: rested a moment on a bed in
the corner, quivered, and vanished.  We approached the bed and
examined it--a half-tester, such as is commonly found in attics
devoted to servants.  On the drawers that stood near it we perceived
an old faded silk kerchief, with the needle still left in a rent half
repaired.  The kerchief was covered with dust; probably it had
belonged to the old woman who had last died in that house, and this
might have been her sleeping-room.  I had sufficient curiosity to
open the drawers: there were a few odds and ends of female dress, and
two letters tied round with a narrow ribbon of faded yellow.  I took
the liberty to possess myself of the letters.  We found nothing else
in the room worth noticing--nor did the light reappear; but we
distinctly heard, as we turned to go, a pattering footfall on the
floor--just before us.  We went through the other attics (in all
four), the footfall still preceding us.  Nothing to be seen--nothing
but the footfall heard.  I had the letters in my hand: just as I was
descending the stairs I distinctly felt my wrist seized, and a faint
soft effort made to draw the letters from my clasp.  I only held them
the more tightly, and the effort ceased.

We regained the bed-chamber appropriated to myself, and I then
remarked that my dog had not followed us when we had left it.  He was
thrusting himself close to the fire, and trembling.  I was impatient
to examine the letters; and while I read them, my servant opened a
little box in which he had deposited the weapons I had ordered him to
bring; took them out, placed them on a table close at my bed-head,
and then occupied himself in soothing the dog, who, however, seemed
to heed him very little.

The letters were short--they were dated; the dates exactly
thirty-five years ago.  They were evidently from a lover to his
mistress, or a husband to some young wife.  Not only the terms of
expression, but a distinct reference to a former voyage, indicated
the writer to have been a seafarer.  The spelling and handwriting
were those of a man imperfectly educated, but still the language
itself was forcible.  In the expressions of endearment there was a
kind of rough wild love; but here and there were dark unintelligible
hints at some secret not of love--some secret that seemed of crime.
"We ought to love each other," was one of the sentences I remember,
"for how every one else would execrate us if all was known."  Again:
"Don't let any one be in the same room with you at night--you talk in
your sleep."  And again: "What's done can't be undone; and I tell you
there's nothing against us unless the dead could come to life."  Here
there was underlined in a better handwriting (a female's): "They do!"
At the end of the letter latest in date the same female hand had
written these words: "Lost at sea the 4th of June, the same day as--"

I put down the letters, and began to muse over their contents.

Fearing, however, that the train of thought into which I fell might
unsteady my nerves, I fully determined to keep my mind in a fit state
to cope with whatever of marvelous the advancing night might bring
forth.  I roused myself--laid the letters on the table--stirred up
the fire, which was still bright and cheering, and opened my volume
of Macaulay.  I read quietly enough till about half-past eleven.  I
then threw myself dressed upon the bed, and told my servant he might
retire to his own room, but must keep himself awake.  I bade him
leave open the door between the two rooms.  Thus alone, I kept two
candles burning on the table by my bed-head.  I placed my watch
beside the weapons, and calmly resumed my Macaulay.  Opposite to me
the fire burned clear; and on the hearth-rug, seemingly asleep, lay
the dog.  In about twenty minutes I felt an exceedingly cold air pass
by my cheek, like a sudden draft.  I fancied the door to my right,
communicating with the landing-place, must have got open; but no--it
was closed.  I then turned my glance to my left, and saw the flame of
the candles violently swayed as by a wind.  At the same moment the
watch beside the revolver softly slid from the table--softly,
softly--no visible hand--it was gone.  I sprang up, seizing the
revolver with the one hand, the dagger with the other: I was not
willing that my weapons should share the fate of the watch.  Thus
armed, I looked round the floor--no sign of the watch.  Three slow,
loud, distinct knocks were now heard at the bed-head; my servant
called out: "Is that you, sir?"

"No; be on your guard."

The dog now roused himself and sat on his haunches, his ears moving
quickly backward and forward.  He kept his eyes fixed on me with a
look so strange that he concentred all my attention on himself.
Slowly, he rose up, all his hair bristling, and stood perfectly
rigid, and with the same wild stare.  I had no time, however, to
examine the dog.  Presently my servant emerged from his room; and if
ever I saw horror in the human face, it was then.  I should not have
recognized him had we met in the street, so altered was every
lineament.  He passed by me quickly, saying in a whisper that seemed
scarcely to come from his lips: "Run--run! it is after me!"  He
gained the door to the landing, pulled it open, and rushed forth.  I
followed him into the landing involuntarily, calling him to stop;
but, without heeding me, he bounded down the stairs, clinging to the
balusters, and taking several steps at a time.  I heard, where I
stood, the street-door open--heard it again clap to.  I was left
alone in the haunted house.

It was but for a moment that I remained undecided whether or not to
follow my servant; pride and curiosity alike forbade so dastardly a
flight.  I reentered my room, closing the door after me, and
proceeded cautiously into the interior chamber.  I encountered
nothing to justify my servant's terror.  I again carefully examined
the walls, to see if there were any concealed door.  I could find no
trace of one--not even a seam in the dull-brown paper with which the
room was hung.  How, then, had the Thing, whatever it was, which had
so scared him, obtained ingress except through my own chamber?

I returned to my room, shut and locked the door that opened upon the
interior one, and stood on the hearth, expectant and prepared.  I now
perceived that the dog had slunk into an angle of the wall, and was
pressing himself close against it, as if literally striving to force
his way into it.  I approached the animal and spoke to it; the poor
brute was evidently beside itself with terror.  It showed all its
teeth, the slaver dropping from its jaws, and would certainly have
bitten me if I had touched it.  It did not seem to recognize me.
Whoever has seen at the Zoological Gardens a rabbit, fascinated by a
serpent, cowering in a corner, may form some idea of the anguish
which the dog exhibited.  Finding all efforts to soothe the animal in
vain, and fearing that his bite might be as venomous in that state as
in the madness of hydrophobia, I left him alone, placed my weapons on
the table beside the fire, seated myself, and recommenced my Macaulay.

Perhaps, in order not to appear seeking credit for a courage, or
rather a coolness, which the reader may conceive I exaggerate, I may
be pardoned if I pause to indulge in one or two egotistical remarks.

As I hold presence of mind, or what is called courage, to be
precisely proportioned to familiarity with the circumstances that
lead to it, so I should say that I had been long sufficiently
familiar with all experiments that appertain to the Marvelous.  I had
witnessed many very extraordinary phenomena in various parts of the
world--phenomena that would be either totally disbelieved if I stated
them, or ascribed to supernatural agencies.  Now, my theory is that
the Supernatural is the Impossible, and that what is called
supernatural is only a something in the laws of nature of which we
have been hitherto ignorant.  Therefore, if a ghost rise before me, I
have not the right to say, "So, then, the supernatural is possible,"
but rather, "So, then, the apparition of a ghost is, contrary to
received opinion, within the laws of nature--i.e., not supernatural."

Now, in all that I had hitherto witnessed, and indeed in all the
wonders which the amateurs of mystery in our age record as facts, a
material living agency is always required.  On the Continent you will
find still magicians who assert that they can raise spirits.  Assume
for the moment that they assert truly, still the living material form
of the magician is present; and he is the material agency by which,
from some constitutional peculiarities, certain strange phenomena are
represented to your natural senses.

Accept, again, as truthful, the tales of Spirit Manifestation in
America--musical or other sounds--writings on paper, produced by no
discernible hand--articles of furniture moved without apparent human
agency--or the actual sight and touch of hands, to which no bodies
seem to belong--still there must be found the Medium, or living being
with constitutional peculiarities capable of obtaining these signs.
In fine, in all such marvels, supposing even that there is no
imposture, there must be a human being like ourselves by whom, or
through whom, the effects presented to human beings are produced.  It
is so with the now familiar phenomena of mesmerism or
electro-biology; the mind of the person operated on is affected
through a material living agent.  Nor, supposing it true that a
mesmerized patient can respond to the will or passes of a mesmerizer
a hundred miles distant, is the response less occasioned by a
material being; it may be through a material fluid--call it Electric,
call it Odic, call it what you will--which has the power of
traversing space and passing obstacles that the material effect is
communicated from one to the other.  Hence all that I had hitherto
witnessed, or expected to witness, in this strange house, I believed
to be occasioned through some agency or medium as mortal as myself;
and this idea necessarily prevented the awe with which those who
regard as supernatural things that are not within the ordinary
operations of nature might have been impressed by the adventures of
that memorable night.

As, then, it was my conjecture that all that was presented, or would
be presented, to my senses must originate in some human being gifted
by constitution with the power so to present them, and having some
motive so to do, I felt an interest in my theory which, in its way,
was rather philosophical than superstitious.  And I can sincerely say
that I was in as tranquil a temper for observation as any practical
experimentalist could be in awaiting the effects of some rare, though
perhaps perilous, chemical combination.  Of course, the more I kept
my mind detached from fancy, the more the temper fitted for
observation would be obtained; and I therefore riveted eye and
thought on the strong daylight sense in the page of my Macaulay.

I now became aware that something interposed between the page and the
light--the page was overshadowed: I looked up, and I saw what I shall
find it very difficult, perhaps impossible, to describe.

It was a darkness shaping itself forth from the air in very undefined
outline.  I can not say it was of a human form, and yet it had more
resemblance to a human form, or rather shadow, than to anything else.
As it stood, wholly apart and distinct from the air and the light
around it, its dimensions seemed gigantic, the summit nearly touching
the ceiling.  While I gazed, a feeling of intense cold seized me.  An
iceberg before me could not more have chilled me; nor could the cold
of an iceberg have been more purely physical.  I feel convinced that
it was not the cold caused by fear.  As I continued to gaze, I
thought--but this I can not say with precision--that I distinguished
two eyes looking down on me from the height.  One moment I fancied
that I distinguished them clearly, the next they seemed gone; but
still two rays of a pale-blue light frequently shot through the
darkness, as from the height on which I half believed, half doubted,
that I had encountered the eyes.

I strove to speak--my voice utterly failed me; I could only think to
myself: "Is this fear? it is not fear!"  I strove to rise--in vain; I
felt as if weighed down by an irresistible force.  Indeed, my
impression was that of an immense and overwhelming power opposed to
my volition--that sense of utter inadequacy to cope with a force
beyond man's, which one may feel physically in a storm at sea, in a
conflagration, or when confronting some terrible wild beast, or
rather, perhaps, the shark of the ocean, I felt morally.  Opposed to
my will was another will, as far superior to its strength as storm,
fire, and shark are superior in material force to the force of man.

And now, as this impression grew on me--now came, at last,
horror--horror to a degree that no words can convey.  Still I
retained pride, if not courage; and in my own mind I said: "This is
horror, but it is not fear; unless I fear I can not be harmed; my
reason rejects this thing; it is an illusion--I do not fear."  With a
violent effort I succeeded at last in stretching out my hand toward
the weapon on the table: as I did so, on the arm and shoulder I
received a strange shock, and my arm fell to my side powerless.  And
now, to add to my horror, the light began slowly to wane from the
candles--they were not, as it were, extinguished, but their flame
seemed very gradually withdrawn: it was the same with the fire--the
light was extracted from the fuel; in a few minutes the room was in
utter darkness.  The dread that came over me, to be thus in the dark
with that dark Thing, whose power was so intensely felt, brought a
reaction of nerve.  In fact, terror had reached that climax, that
either my senses must have deserted me, or I must have burst through
the spell.  I did burst through it.  I found voice, though the voice
was a shriek.  I remembered that I broke forth with words like these:
"I do not fear, my soul does not fear;" and at the same time I found
strength to rise.  Still in that profound gloom I rushed to one of
the windows--tore aside the curtain--flung open the shutters; my
first thought was--Light.  And when I saw the moon high, clear, and
calm, I felt a joy that almost compensated for the previous terror.
There was the moon, there was also the light from the gas-lamps in
the deserted slumberous street.  I turned to look back into the room;
the moon penetrated its shadow very palely and partially--but still
there was light.  The dark Thing, whatever it might be, was
gone--except that I could yet see a dim shadow, which seemed the
shadow of that shade, against the opposite wall.

My eye now rested on the table, and from under the table (which was
without cloth or cover--an old mahogany round table) there rose a
hand, visible as far as the wrist.  It was a hand, seemingly, as much
of flesh and blood as my own, but the hand of an aged person--lean,
wrinkled, small too--a woman's hand.  That hand very softly closed on
the two letters that lay on the table: hand and letters both
vanished.  There then came the same three loud measured knocks I had
heard at the bed-head before this extraordinary drama had commenced.

As those sounds slowly ceased, I felt the whole room vibrate
sensibly; and at the far end there rose, as from the floor, sparks or
globules like bubbles of light, many colored--green, yellow,
fire-red, azure.  Up and down, to and fro, hither, thither, as tiny
Will-o'-the-Wisps, the sparks moved, slow or swift, each at its own
caprice.  A chair (as in the drawing-room below) was now advanced
from the wall without apparent agency, and placed at the opposite
side of the table.  Suddenly, as forth from the chair, there grew a
shape--a woman's shape.  It was distinct as a shape of life--ghastly
as a shape of death.  The face was that of youth, with a strange
mournful beauty; the throat and shoulders were bare, the rest of the
form in a loose robe of cloudy white.  It began sleeking its long
yellow hair, which fell over its shoulders; its eyes were not turned
toward me, but to the door; it seemed listening, watching, waiting.
The shadow of the shade in the background grew darker; and again I
thought I beheld the eyes gleaming out from the summit of the
shadow--eyes fixed upon that shape.

As if from the door, though it did not open, there grew out another
shape, equally distinct, equally ghastly--a man's shape--a young
man's.  It was in the dress of the last century, or rather in a
likeness of such dress (for both the male shape and the female,
though defined, were evidently unsubstantial,
impalpable--simulacra--phantasms); and there was something
incongruous, grotesque, yet fearful, in the contrast between the
elaborate finery, the courtly precision of that old-fashioned garb,
with its ruffles and lace and buckles, and the corpse-like stillness
of the flitting wearer.  Just as the male shape approached the
female, the dark Shadow started from the wall, all three for a moment
wrapped in darkness.  When the pale light returned, the two phantoms
were as if in the grasp of the Shadow that towered between them; and
there was a blood-stain on the breast of the female; and the phantom
male was leaning on its phantom sword, and blood seemed trickling
fast from the ruffles, from the lace; and the darkness of the
intermediate Shadow swallowed them up--they were gone.  And again the
bubbles of light shot, and sailed, and undulated, growing thicker and
thicker and more wildly confused in their movements.

The closet door to the right of the fireplace now opened, and from
the aperture there came the form of an aged woman.  In her hand she
held letters--the very letters over which I had seen the Hand close;
and behind her I heard a footstep.  She turned round as if to listen,
and then she opened the letters and seemed to read; and over her
shoulder I saw a livid face, the face as of a man long
drowned--bloated, bleached--seaweed tangled in its dripping hair; and
at her feet lay a form as of a corpse, and beside the corpse there
cowered a child, a miserable squalid child, with famine in its cheeks
and fear in its eyes.  And as I looked in the old woman's face, the
wrinkles and lines vanished, and it became a face of
youth--hard-eyed, stony, but still youth; and the Shadow darted
forth, and darkened over these phantoms as it had darkened over the
last.

Nothing now was left but the Shadow, and on that my eyes were
intently fixed, till again eyes grew out of the Shadow--malignant,
serpent eyes.  And the bubbles of light again rose and fell, and in
their disordered, irregular, turbulent maze, mingled with the wan
moonlight.  And now from these globules themselves, as from the shell
of an egg, monstrous things burst out; the air grew filled with them;
larvæ so bloodless and so hideous that I can in no way describe them
except to remind the reader of the swarming life which the solar
microscope brings before his eyes in a drop of water--things
transparent, supple, agile, chasing each other, devouring each
other--forms like naught ever beheld by the naked eye.  As the shapes
were without symmetry, so their movements were without order.  In
their very vagrancies there was no sport; they came round me and
round, thicker and faster and swifter, swarming over my head,
crawling over my right arm, which was outstretched in involuntary
command against all evil beings.  Sometimes I felt myself touched,
but not by them; invisible hands touched me.  Once I felt the clutch
as of cold soft fingers at my throat.  I was still equally conscious
that if I gave way to fear I should be in bodily peril; and I
concentred all my faculties in the single focus of resisting,
stubborn will.  And I turned my sight from the Shadow--above all,
from those strange serpent eyes--eyes that had now become distinctly
visible.  For there, though in naught else around me, I was aware
that there was a WILL, and a will of intense, creative, working evil,
which might crush down my own.

The pale atmosphere in the room began now to redden as if in the air
of some near conflagration.  The larvæ grew lurid as things that live
in fire.  Again the room vibrated; again were heard the three
measured knocks; and again all things were swallowed up in the
darkness of the dark Shadow, as if out of that darkness all had come,
into that darkness all returned.

As the gloom receded, the Shadow was wholly gone.  Slowly, as it had
been withdrawn, the flame grew again into the candles on the table,
again into the fuel in the grate.  The whole room came once more
calmly, healthfully into sight.

The two doors were still closed, the door communicating with the
servant's room still locked.  In the corner of the wall, into which
he had so convulsively niched himself, lay the dog.  I called to
him--no movement; I approached--the animal was dead; his eyes
protruded; his tongue out of his mouth; the froth gathered round his
jaws.  I took him in my arms; I brought him to the fire; I felt acute
grief for the loss of my poor favorite--acute self-reproach; I
accused myself of his death; I imagined he had died of fright.  But
what was my surprise on finding that his neck was actually broken.
Had this been done in the dark?--must it not have been by a hand
human as mine?--must there not have been a human agency all the while
in that room?  Good cause to suspect it.  I can not tell.  I can not
do more than state the fact fairly; the reader may draw his own
inference.

Another surprising circumstance--my watch was restored to the table
from which it had been so mysteriously withdrawn; but it had stopped
at the very moment it was so withdrawn; nor, despite all the skill of
the watchmaker, has it ever gone since--that is, it will go in a
strange erratic way for a few hours, and then come to a dead stop--it
is worthless.


Nothing more chanced for the rest of the night.  Nor, indeed, had I
long to wait before the dawn broke.  Nor till it was broad daylight
did I quit the haunted house.  Before I did so, I revisited the
little blind room in which my servant and myself had been for a time
imprisoned.  I had a strong impression--for which I could not
account--that from that room had originated the mechanism of the
phenomena--if I may use the term--which had been experienced in my
chamber.  And though I entered it now in the clear day, with the sun
peering through the filmy window, I still felt, as I stood on its
floors, the creep of the horror which I had first there experienced
the night before, and which had been so aggravated by what had passed
in my own chamber.  I could not, indeed, bear to stay more than half
a minute within those walls.  I descended the stairs, and again I
heard the footfall before me; and when I opened the street door, I
thought I could distinguish a very low laugh.  I gained my own house,
expecting to find my runaway servant there.  But he had not presented
himself, nor did I hear more of him for three days, when I received a
letter from him, dated from Liverpool to this effect:


"Honored Sir--I humbly entreat your pardon, though I can scarcely
hope that you will think that I deserve it, unless--which Heaven
forbid!--you saw what I did.  I feel that it will be years before I
can recover myself; and as to being fit for service, it is out of the
question.  I am therefore going to my brother-in-law at Melbourne.
The ship sails to-morrow.  Perhaps the long voyage may set me up.  I
do nothing now but start and tremble, and fancy It is behind me.  I
humbly beg you, honored sir, to order my clothes, and whatever wages
are due to me, to be sent to my mother's, at Walworth--John knows her
address."


The letter ended with additional apologies, somewhat incoherent, and
explanatory details as to effects that had been under the writer's
charge.

This flight may perhaps warrant a suspicion that the man wished to go
to Australia, and had been somehow or other fraudulently mixed up
with the events of the night.  I say nothing in refutation of that
conjecture; rather, I suggest it as one that would seem to many
persons the most probable solution of improbable occurrences.  My
belief in my own theory remained unshaken.  I returned in the evening
to the house, to bring away in a hack cab the things I had left
there, with my poor dog's body.  In this task I was not disturbed,
nor did any incident worth note befall me, except that still, on
ascending and descending the stairs, I heard the same footfall in
advance.  On leaving the house, I went to Mr. J----'s.  He was at
home.  I returned him the keys, told him that my curiosity was
sufficiently gratified, and was about to relate quickly what had
passed, when he stopped me, and said, though with much politeness,
that he had no longer any interest in a mystery which none had ever
solved.

I determined at least to tell him of the two letters I had read, as
well as of the extraordinary manner in which they had disappeared,
and I then inquired if he thought they had been addressed to the
woman who had died in the house, and if there were anything in her
early history which could possibly confirm the dark suspicions to
which the letters gave rise.  Mr. J---- seemed startled, and, after
musing a few moments, answered: "I am but little acquainted with the
woman's earlier history, except, as I before told you, that her
family were known to mine.  But you revive some vague reminiscences
to her prejudice.  I will make inquiries, and inform you of their
result.  Still, even if we could admit the popular superstition that
a person who had been either the perpetrator or the victim of dark
crimes in life could revisit, as a restless spirit, the scene in
which those crimes had been committed, I should observe that the
house was infested by strange sights and sounds before the old woman
died--you smile--what would you say?"

"I would say this, that I am convinced, if we could get to the bottom
of these mysteries, we should find a living human agency."

"What!  you believe it is all an imposture? for what object?"

"Not an imposture in the ordinary sense of the word.  If suddenly I
were to sink into a deep sleep, from which you could not awake me,
but in that sleep could answer questions with an accuracy which I
could not pretend to when awake--tell you what money you had in your
pocket--nay, describe your very thoughts--it is not necessarily an
imposture, any more than it is necessarily supernatural.  I should
be, unconsciously to myself, under a mesmeric influence, conveyed to
me from a distance by a human being who had acquired power over me by
previous rapport."

"But if a mesmerizer could so affect another living being, can you
suppose that a mesmerizer could also affect inanimate objects; move
chairs--open and shut doors?"

"Or impress our senses with the belief in such effects--we never
having been _en rapport_ with the person acting on us?  No.  What is
commonly called mesmerism could not do this; but there may be a power
akin to mesmerism and superior to it--the power that in the old days
was called Magic.  That such a power may extend to all inanimate
objects of matter, I do not say; but if so, it would not be against
nature--it would only be a rare power in nature which might be given
to constitutions with certain peculiarities, and cultivated by
practise to an extraordinary degree.  That such a power might extend
over the dead--that is, over certain thoughts and memories that the
dead may still retain--and compel, not that which ought properly to
be called the Soul, and which is far beyond human reach, but rather a
phantom of what has been most earth-stained on earth to make itself
apparent to our senses--is a very ancient though obsolete theory,
upon which I will hazard no opinion.  But I do not conceive the power
would be supernatural.  Let me illustrate what I mean from an
experiment which Paracelsus describes as not difficult, and which the
author of the 'Curiosities of Literature' cites as credible: A flower
perishes; you burn it.  Whatever were the elements of that flower
while it lived are gone, dispersed, you know not whither; you can
never discover nor re-collect them.  But you can, by chemistry, out
of the burned dust of that flower, raise a spectrum of the flower,
just as it seemed in life.  It may be the same with the human being.
The soul has as much escaped you as the essence or elements of the
flower.  Still you may make a spectrum of it.  And this phantom,
though in the popular superstition it is held to be the soul of the
departed, must not be confounded with the true soul; it is but the
_eidolon_ of the dead form.  Hence, like the best attested stories of
ghosts or spirits, the thing that most strikes us is the absence of
what we hold to be the soul; that is, of superior emancipated
intelligence.  These apparitions come for little or no object--they
seldom speak when they do come; if they speak, they utter no ideas
above those of an ordinary person on earth.  American spirit-seers
have published volumes of communications, in prose and verse, which
they assert to be given in the names of the most illustrious
dead--Shakespeare, Bacon--heaven knows whom.  Those communications,
taking the best, are certainly not a whit of higher order than would
be communications from living persons of fair talent and education;
they are wondrously inferior to what Bacon, Shakespeare, and Plato
said and wrote when on earth.  Nor, what is more noticeable, do they
ever contain an idea that was not on the earth before.  Wonderful,
therefore, as such phenomena may be (granting them to be truthful), I
see much that philosophy may question, nothing that it is incumbent
on philosophy to deny--viz., nothing supernatural.  They are but
ideas conveyed somehow or other (we have not yet discovered the
means) from one mortal brain to another.  Whether, in so doing,
tables walk of their own accord, or fiendlike shapes appear in a
magic circle, or bodyless hands rise and remove material objects, or
a Thing of Darkness, such as presented itself to me, freeze our
blood--still am I persuaded that these are but agencies conveyed, as
by electric wires, to my own brain from the brain of another.  In
some constitutions there is a natural chemistry, and those
constitutions may produce chemic wonders--in others a natural fluid,
call it electricity, and these may produce electric wonders.  But the
wonders differ from Natural Science in this--they are alike
objectless, purposeless, puerile, frivolous.  They lead on to no
grand results; and therefore the world does not heed, and true sages
have not cultivated them.  But sure I am, that of all I saw or heard,
a man, human as myself, was the remote originator; and I believe
unconsciously to himself as to the exact effects produced, for this
reason: no two persons, you say, have ever told you that they
experienced exactly the same thing.  Well, observe, no two persons
ever experience exactly the same dream.  If this were an ordinary
imposture, the machinery would be arranged for results that would but
little vary; if it were a supernatural agency permitted by the
Almighty, it would surely be for some definite end.  These phenomena
belong to neither class; my persuasion is that they originate in some
brain now far distant; that that brain had no distinct volition in
anything that occurred; that what does occur reflects but its
devious, motley, ever-shifting, half-formed thoughts; in short, that
it has been but the dreams of such a brain put into action and
invested with a semi-substance.  That this brain is of immense power,
that it can set matter into movement, that it is malignant and
destructive, I believe; some material force must have killed my dog;
the same force might, for aught I know, have sufficed to kill myself,
had I been as subjugated by terror as the dog--had my intellect or my
spirit given me no countervailing resistance in my will."

"It killed your dog! that is fearful! indeed it is strange that no
animal can be induced to stay in that house; not even a cat.  Rats
and mice are never found in it."

"The instincts of the brute creation detect influences deadly to
their existence.  Man's reason has a sense less subtle, because it
has a resisting power more supreme.  But enough; do you comprehend my
theory?"

"Yes, though imperfectly--and I accept any crotchet (pardon the
word), however odd, rather than embrace at once the notion of ghosts
and hobgoblins we imbibed in our nurseries.  Still, to my unfortunate
house the evil is the same.  What on earth can I do with the house?"

"I will tell you what I would do.  I am convinced from my own
internal feelings that the small unfurnished room at right angles to
the door of the bedroom which I occupied forms a starting-point or
receptacle for the influences which haunt the house; and I strongly
advise you to have the walls opened, the floor removed--nay, the
whole room pulled down.  I observe that it is detached from the body
of the house, built over the small back-yard, and could be removed
without injury to the rest of the building."

"And you think, if I did that--"

"You would cut off the telegraph wires.  Try it.  I am so persuaded
that I am right that I will pay half the expense if you will allow me
to direct the operations."

"Nay, I am well able to afford the cost; for the rest, allow me to
write to you."

About ten days after I received a letter from Mr. J----, telling me
that he had visited the house since I had seen him; that he had found
the two letters I had described, replaced in the drawer from which I
had taken them; that he had read them with misgivings like my own;
that he had instituted a cautious inquiry about the woman to whom I
rightly conjectured they had been written.  It seemed that thirty-six
years ago (a year before the date of the letters) she had married,
against the wish of her relations, an American of very suspicious
character; in fact, he was generally believed to have been a pirate.
She herself was the daughter of very respectable tradespeople, and
had served in the capacity of a nursery governess before her
marriage.  She had a brother, a widower, who was considered wealthy,
and who had one child of about six years old.  A month after the
marriage, the body of this brother was found in the Thames, near
London Bridge; there seemed some marks of violence about his throat,
but they were not deemed sufficient to warrant the inquest in any
other verdict than that of "found drowned."

The American and his wife took charge of the little boy, the deceased
brother having by his will left his sister the guardianship of his
only child--and in event of the child's death, the sister inherited.
The child died about six months afterward--it was supposed to have
been neglected and ill-treated.  The neighbors deposed to having
heard it shriek at night.  The surgeon who had examined it after
death said that it was emaciated as if from want of nourishment, and
the body was covered with livid bruises.  It seemed that one winter
night the child had sought to escape--crept out into the
back-yard--tried to scale the wall--fallen back exhausted, and been
found at morning on the stones in a dying state.  But though there
was some evidence of cruelty, there was none of murder; and the aunt
and her husband had sought to palliate cruelty by alleging the
exceeding stubbornness and perversity of the child, who was declared
to be half-witted.  Be that as it may, at the orphan's death the aunt
inherited her brother's fortune.  Before the first wedded year was
out, the American quitted England abruptly, and never returned to it.
He obtained a cruising vessel, which was lost in the Atlantic two
years afterward.  The widow was left in affluence; but reverses of
various kinds had befallen her: a bank broke--an investment
failed--she went into a small business and became insolvent--then she
entered into service, sinking lower and lower, from housekeeper down
to maid-of-all-work--never long retaining a place, though nothing
decided against her character was ever alleged.  She was considered
sober, honest, and peculiarly quiet in her ways; still nothing
prospered with her.  And so she had dropped into the workhouse, from
which Mr. J---- had taken her, to be placed in charge of the very
house which she had rented as mistress in the first year of her
wedded life.

Mr. J---- added that he had passed an hour alone in the unfurnished
room which I had urged him to destroy, and that his impressions of
dread while there were so great, though he had neither heard nor seen
anything, that he was eager to have the walls bared and the floors
removed as I had suggested.  He had engaged persons for the work, and
would commence any day I would name.

The day was accordingly fixed.  I repaired to the haunted house--we
went into the blind dreary room, took up the skirting, and then the
floors.  Under the rafters, covered with rubbish, was found a
trap-door, quite large enough to admit a man.  It was closely nailed
down, with clamps and rivets of iron.  On removing these we descended
into a room below, the existence of which had never been suspected.
In this room there had been a window and a flue, but they had been
bricked over, evidently for many years.  By the help of candles we
examined this place; it still retained some moldering
furniture--three chairs, an oak settle, a table--all of the fashion
of about eighty years ago.  There was a chest of drawers against the
wall, in which we found, half-rotted away, old-fashioned articles of
a man's dress, such as might have been worn eighty or a hundred years
ago by a gentleman of some rank--costly steel buckles and buttons,
like those yet worn in court-dresses, a handsome court sword--in a
waistcoat which had once been rich with gold-lace, but which was now
blackened and foul with damp, we found five guineas, a few silver
coins, and an ivory ticket, probably for some place of entertainment
long since passed away.  But our main discovery was in a kind of iron
safe fixed to the wall, the lock of which it cost us much trouble to
get picked.

In this safe were three shelves, and two small drawers.  Ranged on
the shelves were several small bottles of crystal, hermetically
stoppered.  They contained colorless volatile essences, of the nature
of which I shall only say that they were not poisonous--phosphor and
ammonia entered into some of them.  There were also some very curious
glass tubes, and a small pointed rod of iron, with a large lump of
rock-crystal, and another of amber--also a loadstone of great power.

In one of the drawers we found a miniature portrait set in gold, and
retaining the freshness of its colors most remarkably, considering
the length of time it had probably been there.  The portrait was that
of a man who might be somewhat advanced in middle life, perhaps
forty-seven or forty-eight.

It was a remarkable face--a most impressive face.  If you could fancy
some mighty serpent transformed into man, preserving in the human
lineaments the old serpent type, you would have a better idea of that
countenance than long descriptions can convey: the width and flatness
of frontal--the tapering elegance of contour disguising the strength
of the deadly jaw--the long, large, terrible eye, glittering and
green as the emerald--and withal a certain ruthless calm, as if from
the consciousness of an immense power.

Mechanically I turned round the miniature to examine the back of it,
and on the back was engraved a pentacle; in the middle of the
pentacle a ladder, and the third step of the ladder was formed by the
date 1765.  Examining still more minutely, I detected a spring; this,
on being pressed, opened the back of the miniature as a lid.
Withinside the lid was engraved, "Marianna to thee--Be faithful in
life and in death to ----."  Here follows a name that I will not
mention, but it was not unfamiliar to me.  I had heard it spoken of
by old men in my childhood as the name borne by a dazzling charlatan
who had made a great sensation in London for a year or so, and had
fled the country on the charge of a double murder within his own
house--that of his mistress and his rival.  I said nothing of this to
Mr. J----, to whom reluctantly I resigned the miniature.

We had found no difficulty in opening the first drawer within the
iron safe; we found great difficulty in opening the second: it was
not locked, but it resisted all efforts, till we inserted in the
chinks the edge of a chisel.  When we had thus drawn it forth, we
found a very singular apparatus in the nicest order.  Upon a small
thin book, or rather tablet, was placed a saucer of crystal; this
saucer was filled with a clear liquid--on that liquid floated a kind
of compass, with a needle shifting rapidly round; but instead of the
usual points of a compass were seven strange characters, not very
unlike those used by astrologers to denote the planets.  A peculiar
but not strong nor displeasing odor came from this drawer, which was
lined with a wood that we afterward discovered to be hazel.  Whatever
the cause of this odor, it produced a material effect on the nerves.
We all felt it, even the two workmen who were in the room--a
creeping, tingling sensation from the tips of the fingers to the
roots of the hair.  Impatient to examine the tablet, I removed the
saucer.  As I did so the needle of the compass went round and round
with exceeding swiftness, and I felt a shock that ran through my
whole frame, so that I dropped the saucer on the floor.  The liquid
was spilled--the saucer was broken--the compass rolled to the end of
the room--and at that instant the walls shook to and fro, as if a
giant had swayed and rocked them.

The two workmen were so frightened that they ran up the ladder by
which we had descended from the trap-door; but seeing that nothing
more happened, they were easily induced to return.

Meanwhile I had opened the tablet: it was bound in plain red leather,
with a silver clasp; it contained but one sheet of thick vellum, and
on that sheet were inscribed, within a double pentacle, words in old
monkish Latin, which are literally to be translated thus: "On all
that it can reach within these walls--sentient or inanimate, living
or dead--as moves the needle, so work my will!  Accursed be the
house, and restless be the dwellers therein."

We found no more.  Mr. J---- burned the tablet and its anathema.  He
razed to the foundations the part of the building containing the
secret room with the chamber over it.  He had then the courage to
inhabit the house himself for a month, and a quieter,
better-conditioned house could not be found in all London.
Subsequently he let it to advantage, and his tenant has made no
complaints.




THE DREAM-WOMAN

BY WILKIE COLLINS

_William Wilkie Collins, born in London in 1824, was the son of the
painter William Collins.  He was always called "Wilkie."  Educated
privately, he was articled to a London tea merchant; but, publishing
a book (afterward issued as "Antonina"), he devoted himself to
letters.  In 1851, he met Dickens, and wrote for "Household Words,"
and sometimes collaborated with him.  His works include: "After
Dark," "The Woman in White," "No Name, "The New Magdalen," and "The
Moonstone."  "The Dream-Woman," which exhibits many of his most
striking characteristics, is from "The Queen of Hearts" (1860).  He
died in London in 1889._



THE DREAM-WOMAN

By WILKIE COLLINS

Some years ago there lived in the suburbs of a large seaport town on
the west coast of England a man in humble circumstances, by name
Isaac Scatchard.  His means of subsistence were derived from any
employment that he could get as an ostler, and occasionally when
times went well with him, from temporary engagements in service as
stable-helper in private houses.  Though a faithful, steady, and
honest man, he got on badly in his calling.  His ill-luck was
proverbial among his neighbors.  He was always missing good
opportunities by no fault of his own, and always living longest in
service with amiable people who were not punctual payers of wages.
"Unlucky Isaac" was his nickname in his own neighborhood, and no one
could say that he did not richly deserve it.

With far more than one man's fair share of adversity to endure, Isaac
had but one consolation to support him, and that was of the dreariest
and most negative kind.  He had no wife and children to increase his
anxieties and add to the bitterness of his various failures in life.
It might have been from mere insensibility, or it might have been
from generous unwillingness to involve another in his own unlucky
destiny; but the fact undoubtedly was, that he had arrived at the
middle term of life without marrying, and, what is much more
remarkable, without once exposing himself, from eighteen to
eight-and-thirty, to the genial imputation of ever having had a
sweetheart.

When he was out of service he lived alone with his widowed mother.
Mrs. Scatchard was a woman above the average in her lowly station as
to capacity and manners.  She had seen better days, as the phrase is,
but she never referred to them in the presence of curious visitors;
and, though perfectly polite to every one who approached her, never
cultivated any intimacies among her neighbors.  She contrived to
provide hardly enough for her simple wants by doing rough work for
the tailors, and always managed to keep a decent home for her son to
return to whenever his ill-luck drove him out helpless into the world.

One bleak autumn, when Isaac was getting on fast toward forty, and
when he was, as usual, out of place through no fault of his own, he
set forth from his mother's cottage on a long walk inland to a
gentleman's seat, where he had heard that a stable-helper was
required.

It wanted then but two days of his birthday; and Mrs. Scatchard, with
her usual fondness, made him promise, before he started, that he
would be back in time to keep that anniversary with her, in as
festive a way as their poor means would allow.  It was easy for him
to comply with this request, even supposing he slept a night each way
on the road.

He was to start from home on Monday morning, and, whether he got the
new place or not, he was to be back for his birthday dinner on
Wednesday at two o'clock.

Arriving at his destination too late on the Monday night to make
application for the stable-helper's place, he slept at the village
inn, and in good time on the Tuesday morning presented himself at the
gentleman's house to fill the vacant situation.  Here again his
ill-luck pursued him as inexorably as ever.  The excellent written
testimonials to his character which he was able to procure availed
him nothing; his long walk had been taken in vain: only the day
before the stable-helper's place had been given to another man.

Isaac accepted this new disappointment resignedly and as a matter of
course.  Naturally slow in capacity, he had the bluntness of
sensibility and phlegmatic patience of disposition which frequently
distinguish men with sluggishly working mental powers.  He thanked
the gentleman's steward with his usual quiet civility for granting
him an interview, and took his departure with no appearance of
unusual depression in his face or manner.

Before starting on his homeward walk, he made some inquiries at the
inn, and ascertained that he might save a few miles on his return by
following a new road.  Furnished with full instructions, several
times repeated, as to the various turnings he was to take, he set
forth on his homeward journey, and walked on all day with only one
stoppage for bread and cheese.  Just as it was getting toward dark,
the rain came on and the wind began to rise, and he found himself, to
make matters worse, in a part of the country with which he was
entirely unacquainted, though he knew himself to be some fifteen
miles from home.  The first house he found to inquire at was a lonely
roadside inn, standing on the outskirts of a thick wood.  Solitary as
the place looked, it was welcome to a lost man who was also hungry,
thirsty, foot-sore, and wet.  The landlord was civil, and
respectable-looking, and the price he asked for a bed was reasonable
enough.  Isaac therefore decided on stopping comfortably at the inn
for that night.

He was constitutionally a temperate man.  His supper consisted of two
rashers of bacon, a slice of home-made bread, and a pint of ale.  He
did not go to bed immediately after this moderate meal, but sat up
with the landlord, talking about his bad prospects and his long run
of ill-luck, and diverging from these topics to the subject of
horse-flesh and racing.  Nothing was said either by himself, his
host, or the few laborers who strayed into the tap-room, which could,
in the slightest degree, excite the very small and very dull
imaginative faculty which Isaac Scatchard possessed.

At a little after eleven the house was closed.  Isaac went round with
the landlord and held the candle while the doors and lower windows
were being secured.  He noticed with surprise the strength of the
bolts and bars, and iron-sheathed shutters.

"You see we are rather lonely here," said the landlord.  "We never
have had any attempts made to break in yet, but it's always as well
to be on the safe side.  When nobody is sleeping here, I am the only
man in the house.  My wife and daughter are timid, and the
servant-girl takes after her missuses.  Another glass of ale before
you turn in?  No!  Well, how such a sober man as you come to be out
of a place is more than I can make out, for one.  Here's where you're
to sleep.  You're our only lodger to-night, and I think you'll say my
missus has done her best to make you comfortable.  You're quite sure
you won't have another glass of ale?  Very well.  Good-night."

It was half-past eleven by the clock in the passage as they went
upstairs to the bedroom, the window of which looked on to the wood at
the back of the house.

Isaac locked the door, set his candle on the chest of drawers, and
wearily got ready for bed.  The bleak autumn wind was still blowing,
and the solemn, monotonous, surging moan of it in the wood was dreary
and awful to hear through the night-silence.  Isaac felt strangely
wakeful.  He resolved, as he lay down in bed, to keep the candle
alight until he began to grow sleepy, for there was something
unendurably depressing in the bare idea of laying awake in the
darkness, listening to the dismal, ceaseless moaning of the wind in
the wood.

Sleep stole on him before he was aware of it.  His eyes closed, and
he fell off insensibly to rest without having so much as thought of
extinguishing the candle.

The first sensation of which he was conscious after sinking into
slumber was a strange shivering that ran through him suddenly from
head to foot, and a dreadful sinking pain at the heart, such as he
had never felt before.  The shivering only disturbed his slumbers;
the pain woke him instantly.  In one moment he passed from a state of
sleep to a state of wakefulness--his eyes wide open--his mental
perceptions cleared on a sudden as if by a miracle.

The candle had burned down nearly to the last morsel of tallow, but
the top of the unsnuffed wick had just fallen off, and the light in
the little room was, for the moment, fair and full.

Between the foot of the bed and the closed door there stood a woman
with a knife in her hand, looking at him.

He was stricken speechless with terror, but he did not lose the
preternatural clearness of his faculties, and he never took his eyes
off the woman.  She said not a word as they stared each other in the
face, but she began to move slowly toward the left-hand side of the
bed.

His eyes followed her.  She was a fair, fine woman, with yellowish
flaxen hair and light-gray eyes, with a droop in the left eyelid.  He
noticed those things, and fixed them on his mind before she was round
at the side of the bed.  Speechless, with no expression in her face,
with no noise following her footfall, she came closer and
closer--stopped and slowly raised the knife.  He laid his right arm
over his throat to save it; but, as he saw the knife coming down,
threw his hand across the bed to the right side, and jerked his body
over that way just as the knife descended on the mattress within an
inch of his shoulder.

His eyes fixed on her arm and hand as she slowly drew her knife out
of the bed; a white, well-shaped arm, with a pretty down lying
lightly over the fair skin--a delicate lady's hand; with the crowning
beauty of a pink flush under and round the finger nails.

She drew the knife out, and passed again slowly to the foot of the
bed; stopped there for a moment looking at him; then came on--still
speechless, still with no expression on the blank, beautiful face,
still with no sound following the stealthy footfalls--came on to the
right side of the bed where he now lay.

As she approached, she raised the knife again, and he drew himself
away to the left side.  She struck, as before, right into the
mattress, with a deliberate, perpendicularly downward action of the
arm.  This time his eyes wandered from her to the knife.  It was like
the large clasp-knives which he had often seen laboring men use to
cut their bread and bacon with.  Her delicate little fingers did not
conceal more than two-thirds of the handle; he noticed that it was
made of buckhorn, clean and shining the blade was, and looking like
new.

For the second time she drew the knife out, concealed it in the wide
sleeve of her gown, then stopped by the bedside, watching him.  For
an instant he saw her standing in that position, then the wick of the
spent candle fell over into the socket, the flame diminished to a
little blue point, and the room grew dark.

A moment, or less, if possible, passed so, and then the wick flamed
up, smokingly, for the last time.  His eyes were still looking
eagerly over the right-hand side of the bed when the final flash of
light came, but they discerned nothing.  The fair woman with the
knife was gone.

The conviction that he was alone again weakened the hold of the
terror that had struck him dumb up to this time.  The preternatural
sharpness which the very intensity of his panic had mysteriously
imparted to his faculties left them suddenly.  His brain grew
confused--his heart beat wildly--his ears opened for the first time
since the appearance of the woman to a sense of the woful, ceaseless
moaning of the wind among the trees.  With the dreadful conviction of
the reality of what he had seen still strong within him, he leaped
out of bed, and screaming, "Murder!  Wake up there! wake up!" dashed
headlong through the darkness to the door.

It was fast locked, exactly as he had left it on going to bed.

His cries on starting up had alarmed the house.  He heard the
terrified, confused exclamations of women; he saw the master of the
house approaching along the passage with his burning rush-candle in
one hand and his gun in the other.

"What is it?" asked the landlord, breathlessly.

Isaac could only answer in a whisper.  "A woman, with a knife in her
hand," he gasped out.  "In my room--a fair, yellow-haired woman; she
jobbed at me with the knife twice over."

The landlord's pale cheeks grew paler.  He looked at Isaac eagerly by
the flickering light of his candle, and his face began to get red
again; his voice altered, too, as well as his complexion.

"She seems to have missed you twice," he said.

"I dodged the knife as it came down," Isaac went on, in the same
scared whisper.  "It struck the bed each time."

The landlord took his candle into the bedroom immediately.  In less
than a minute he came out again into the passage in a violent passion.

"The devil fly away with you and your woman with the knife!  There
isn't a mark in the bedclothes anywhere.  What do you mean by coming
into a man's place, and frightening his family out of their wits
about a dream?"

"I'll leave your house," said Isaac, faintly.  "Better out on the
road, in rain and dark, on my road home, than back again in that
room, after what I've seen in it.  Lend me a light to get my clothes
by, and tell me what I'm to pay."

"Pay!" cried the landlord, leading the way with his light sulkily
into the bedroom.  "You'll find your score on the slate when you go
downstairs.  I wouldn't have taken you in for all the money you've
got about you if I'd known your dreaming, screeching ways beforehand.
Look at the bed.  Where's the cut of a knife in it?  Look at the
window--is the lock bursted?  Look at the door (which I heard you
fasten yourself)--is it broke in?  A murdering woman with a knife in
my house!  You ought to be ashamed of yourself!"

Isaac answered not a word.  He huddled on his clothes, and they went
downstairs together.

"Nigh on twenty minutes past two!" said the landlord, as they passed
a clock.  "A nice time in the morning to frighten honest people out
of their wits!"

Isaac paid his bill, and the landlord let him out at the front door,
asking, with a grin of contempt, as he undid the strong fastenings,
whether "the murdering woman got in that way?"

They parted without a word on either side.  The rain had ceased, but
the night was dark, and the wind bleaker than ever.  Little did the
darkness or the cold or the uncertainty about the way home matter to
Isaac.  If he had been turned out into the wilderness in a
thunderstorm, it would have been a relief after what he had suffered
in the bedroom of the inn.

What was the fair woman with the knife?  The creature of a dream, or
that other creature from the unknown world called among men by the
name of ghost?  He could make nothing of the mystery--had made
nothing of it, even when it was midday on Wednesday, and when he
stood, at last, after many times missing his road, once more on the
doorstep of home.

His mother came out eagerly to receive him.  His face told her in a
moment that something was wrong.

"I've lost the place; but that's my luck.  I dreamed an ill dream
last night, mother--or maybe I saw a ghost.  Take it either way, it
scared me out of my senses, and I am not my own man again yet."

"Isaac, your face frightens me.  Come into the fire--come in, and
tell mother all about it."

He was as anxious to tell as she was to hear: for it had been his
hope, all the way home, that his mother, with her quicker capacity
and superior knowledge, might be able to throw some light on the
mystery which he could not clear up for himself.  His memory of the
dream was still mechanically vivid, though his thoughts were entirely
confused by it.

His mother's face grew paler and paler as he went on.  She never
interrupted him by so much as a single word; but when he had done,
she moved her chair close to his, put her arms around his neck, and
said to him:

"Isaac, you dreamed your ill dream on this Wednesday morning.  What
time was it when you saw the fair woman with a knife in her hand?"

Isaac reflected on what the landlord had said when they had passed by
the clock on his leaving the inn; allowed as nearly as he could for
the time that must have elapsed between the unlocking of his bedroom
door and the paying of his bill just before going away, and answered:

"Somewhere about two o'clock in the morning."

His mother suddenly quitted her hold of his neck, and struck her
hands together with a gesture of despair.

"This Wednesday is your birthday, Isaac, and two o'clock in the
morning was the time when you were born."

Isaac's capacities were not quick enough to catch the infection of
his mother's superstitious dread.  He was amazed, and a little
startled also, when she suddenly rose from her chair, opened her old
writing-desk, took pen, ink, and paper, and then said to him:

"Your memory is but a poor one, Isaac, and now I'm an old woman
mine's not much better.  I want all about this dream of yours to be
as well known to both of us, years hence, as it is now.  Tell me over
again all you told me a minute ago, when you spoke of what the woman
with the knife looked like."

Isaac obeyed, and marveled much as he saw his mother carefully set
down on paper the very words that he was saying.

"Light-gray eyes," she wrote, as they came to the descriptive part,
"with a droop in the left eyelid; flaxen hair, with a gold-yellow
streak in it; white arms, with a down upon them; little lady's hand,
with a reddish look about the finger nails; clasp-knife with a
buckhorn handle, that seemed as good as new."  To these particulars
Mrs. Scatchard added the year, month, day of the week, and time in
the morning when the woman of the dream appeared to her son.  She
then locked up the paper carefully in the writing-desk.

Neither on that day nor on any day after could her son induce her to
return to the matter of the dream.  She obstinately kept her thoughts
about it to herself, and even refused to refer again to the paper in
her writing-desk.  Ere long Isaac grew weary of attempting to make
her break her resolute silence; and time, which sooner or later wears
out all things, gradually wore out the impression produced on him by
the dream.  He began by thinking of it carelessly, and he ended by
not thinking of it at all.

The result was the more easily brought about by the advent of some
important changes for the better in his prospects, which commenced
not long after his terrible night's experience at the inn.  He reaped
at last the reward of his long and patient suffering under adversity
by getting an excellent place, keeping it for seven years, and
leaving it, on the death of his master, not only with an excellent
character, but also with a comfortable annuity bequeathed to him as a
reward for saving his mistress's life in a carriage accident.  Thus
it happened that Isaac Scatchard returned to his old mother, seven
years after the time of the dream at the inn, with an annual sum of
money at his disposal sufficient to keep them both in ease and
independence for the rest of their lives.

The mother, whose health had been bad of late years, profited so much
by the care bestowed on her and by freedom from money anxieties, that
when Isaac's birthday came round she was able to sit up comfortably
at table and dine with him.

On that day, as the evening drew on, Mrs. Scatchard discovered that a
bottle of tonic medicine which she was accustomed to take, and in
which she had fancied that a dose or more was still left, happened to
be empty.  Isaac immediately volunteered to go to the chemist's and
get it filled again.  It was as rainy and bleak an autumn night as on
the memorable past occasion when he lost his way and slept at the
roadside inn.

On going into the chemist's shop he was passed hurriedly by a poorly
dressed woman coming out of it.  The glimpse he had of her face
struck him, and he looked back after her as she descended the door
steps.

"You're noticing that woman?" said the chemist's apprentice behind
the counter.  "It's my opinion there's something wrong with her.
She's been asking for laudanum to put to a bad tooth.  Master's out
for half an hour, and I told her I wasn't allowed to sell poison to
strangers in his absence.  She laughed in a queer way, and said she
would come back in half an hour.  If she expects master to serve her,
I think she'll be disappointed.  It's a case of suicide, sir, if ever
there was one yet."

These words added immeasurably to the sudden interest in the woman
which Isaac had felt at the first sight of her face.  After he had
got the medicine-bottle filled, he looked about anxiously for her as
soon as he was out in the street.  She was walking slowly up and down
on the opposite side of the road.  With his heart, very much to his
own surprise, beating fast, Isaac crossed over and spoke to her.

He asked if she was in any distress.  She pointed to her torn shawl,
her scanty dress, her crushed, dirty bonnet; then moved under a lamp
so as to let the light fall on her stern, pale, but still most
beautiful face.

"I look like a comfortable, happy woman, don't I?" she said, with a
bitter laugh.

She spoke with a purity of intonation which Isaac had never heard
before from other lips than ladies' lips.  Her slightest action
seemed to have the easy, negligent grace of a thoroughbred woman.
Her skin, for all its poverty-stricken paleness, was as delicate as
if her life had been passed in the enjoyment of every social comfort
that wealth can purchase.  Even her small, finely shaped hands,
gloveless as they were, had not lost their whiteness.

Little by little, in answer to his question, the sad story of the
woman came out.  There is no need to relate it here; it is told over
and over again in police reports and paragraphs about attempted
suicides.

"My name is Rebecca Murdoch," said the woman, as she ended.  "I have
ninepence left, and I thought of spending it at the chemist's over
the way in securing a passage to the other world.  Whatever it is, it
can't be worse to me than this, so why should I stop here?"

Besides the natural compassion and sadness moved in his heart by what
he heard, Isaac felt within him some mysterious influence at work all
the time the woman was speaking which utterly confused his ideas and
almost deprived him of his powers of speech.  All that he could say
in answer to her last reckless words was that he would prevent her
from attempting her own life, if he followed her about all night to
do it.  His rough, trembling earnestness seemed to impress her.

"I won't occasion you that trouble," she answered, when he repeated
his threat.  "You have given me a fancy for living by speaking kindly
to me.  No need for the mockery of protestations and promises.  You
may believe me without them.  Come to Fuller's Meadow to-morrow at
twelve, and you will find me alive, to answer for myself--  No!--no
money.  My ninepence will do to get me as good a night's lodging as I
want."

She nodded and left him.  He made no attempt to follow--he felt no
suspicion that she was deceiving him.

"It's strange, but I can't help believing her," he said to himself,
and walked away, bewildered, toward home.

On entering the house his mind was still so completely absorbed by
its new subject of interest that he took no notice of what his mother
was doing when he came in with the bottle of medicine.  She had
opened her old writing-desk in his absence, and was now reading a
paper attentively that lay inside it.  On every birthday of Isaac's
since she had written down the particulars of his dream from his own
lips, she had been accustomed to read that same paper, and ponder
over it in private.

The next day he went to Fuller's Meadow.

He had done only right in believing her so implicitly.  She was
there, punctual to a minute, to answer for herself.  The last-left
faint defenses in Isaac's heart against the fascination which a word
or look from her began inscrutably to exercise over him sank down and
vanished before her forever on that memorable morning.

When a man previously insensible to the influence of woman forms an
attachment in middle life, the instances are rare indeed, let the
warning circumstances be what they may, in which he is found capable
of freeing himself from the tyranny of the new ruling passion.  The
charm of being spoken to familiarly, fondly, and gratefully by a
woman whose language and manners still retained enough of their early
refinement to hint at the high social station that she had lost,
would have been a dangerous luxury to a man of Isaac's rank at the
age of twenty.  But it was far more than that--it was certain ruin to
him--now that his heart was opening unworthily to a new influence at
that middle time of life when strong feelings of all kinds, once
implanted, strike root most stubbornly in a man's moral nature.  A
few more stolen interviews after that first morning in Fuller's
Meadow completed his infatuation.  In less than a month from the time
when he first met her, Isaac Scatchard had consented to give Rebecca
Murdoch a new interest in existence and a chance of recovering the
character she had lost by promising to make her his wife.

She had taken possession, not of his passions only, but of his
faculties as well.  All the mind he had he put into her keeping.  She
directed him on every point--even instructing him how to break the
news of his approaching marriage in the safest manner to his mother.

"If you tell her how you met me and who I am at first," said the
cunning woman, "she will move heaven and earth to prevent our
marriage.  Say I am the sister of one of your fellow-servants--ask
her to see me before you go into any more particulars--and leave it
to me to do the rest.  I mean to make her love me next best to you,
Isaac, before she knows anything of who I really am."

The motive of the deceit was sufficient to sanctify it to Isaac.  The
stratagem proposed relieved him of his one great anxiety, and quieted
his uneasy conscience on the subject of his mother.  Still, there was
something wanting to perfect his happiness, something that he could
not realize, something mysteriously untraceable, and yet something
that perpetually made itself felt; not when he was absent from
Rebecca Murdoch, but, strange to say, when he was actually in her
presence!  She was kindness itself with him.  She never made him feel
his inferior capacities and inferior manners.  She showed the
sweetest anxiety to please him in the smallest trifles; but, in spite
of all these attractions, he never could feel quite at his ease with
her.  At their first meeting there had mingled with his admiration,
when he looked in her face, a faint, involuntary feeling of doubt
whether that face was entirely strange to him.  No after-familiarity
had the slightest effect on this inexplicable, wearisome uncertainty.

Concealing the truth as he had been directed, he announced his
marriage engagement precipitately and confusedly to his mother on the
day when he contracted it.  Poor Mrs. Scatchard showed her perfect
confidence in her son by flinging her arms round his neck, and giving
him joy of having found at last, in the sister of one of his
fellow-servants, a woman to comfort and care for him after his mother
was gone.  She was all eagerness to see the woman of her son's
choice, and the next day was fixed for the introduction.

It was a bright sunny morning, and the little cottage parlor was full
of light as Mrs. Scatchard, happy and expectant, dressed for the
occasion in her Sunday gown, sat waiting for her son and her future
daughter-in-law.

Punctual to the appointed time, Isaac hurriedly and nervously led his
promised wife into the room.  His mother rose to receive
her--advanced a few steps smiling--looked Rebecca full in the eyes,
and suddenly stopped.  Her face, which had been flushed the moment
before, turned white in an instant; her eyes lost their expression of
softness and kindness, and assumed a blank look of terror; her
outstretched hands fell to her sides, and she staggered back a few
steps with a low cry to her son.

"Isaac," she whispered, clutching him fast by the arm when he asked
alarmedly if she was taken ill, "Isaac, does that woman's face remind
you of nothing?"

Before he could answer--before he could look round to where Rebecca
stood, astonished and angered by her reception, at the lower end of
the room--his mother pointed impatiently to her writing-desk, and
gave him the key.

"Open it," she said, in a quick, breathless whisper.

"What does this mean?  Why am I treated as if I had no business here?
Does your mother want to insult me?" asked Rebecca, angrily.

"Open it, and give me the paper in the left-hand drawer.  Quick!
quick, for Heaven's sake!" said Mrs. Scatchard, shrinking further
back in terror.

Isaac gave her the paper.  She looked it over eagerly for a moment,
then followed Rebecca, who was now turning away haughtily to leave
the room, and caught her by the shoulder--abruptly raised the long,
loose sleeve of her gown, and glanced at her hand and arm.  Something
like fear began to steal over the angry expression of Rebecca's face
as she shook herself free from the old woman's grasp.  "Mad!" she
said to herself, "and Isaac never told me."  With these few words she
left the room.

Isaac was hastening after her when his mother turned and stopped his
further progress.  It wrung his heart to see the misery and terror in
her face as she looked at him.

"Light-gray eyes," she said, in low, mournful, awe-struck tones,
pointing toward the open door; "a droop in the left eyelid; flaxen
hair, with a gold-yellow streak in it; white arms, with a down upon
them; little lady's hand, with a reddish look under the finger
nails--The Dream-Woman, Isaac, the Dream-Woman!"

That faint cleaving doubt which he had never been able to shake off
in Rebecca Murdoch's presence was fatally set at rest forever.  He
had seen her face, then, before--seven years before, on his birthday,
in the bedroom of the lonely inn.

"Be warned!  oh, my son, be warned!  Isaac, Isaac, let her go, and do
you stop with me!"

Something darkened the parlor window as those words were said.  A
sudden chill ran through him, and he glanced sidelong at the shadow.
Rebecca Murdoch had come back.  She was peering in curiously at them
over the low window-blind.

"I have promised to marry, mother," he said, "and marry I must."

The tears came into his eyes as he spoke and dimmed his sight, but he
could just discern the fatal face outside moving away again from the
window.

His mother's head sank lower.

"Are you faint?" he whispered.

"Broken-hearted, Isaac."

He stooped down and kissed her.  The shadow, as he did so, returned
to the window, and the fatal face peered in curiously once more.

Three weeks after that day Isaac and Rebecca were man and wife.  All
that was hopelessly dogged and stubborn in the man's moral nature
seemed to have closed round his fatal passion, and to have fixed it
unassailably in his heart.

After that first interview in the cottage parlor no consideration
would induce Mrs. Scatchard to see her son's wife again, or even to
talk of her when Isaac tried hard to plead her cause after their
marriage.

This course of conduct was not in any degree occasioned by a
discovery of the degradation in which Rebecca had lived.  There was
no question of that between mother and son.  There was no question of
anything but the fearfully exact resemblance between the living,
breathing woman and the spectre-woman of Isaac's dream.

Rebecca, on her side, neither felt nor expressed the slightest sorrow
at the estrangement between herself and her mother-in-law.  Isaac,
for the sake of peace, had never contradicted her first idea that age
and long illness had affected Mrs. Scatchard's mind.  He even allowed
his wife to upbraid him for not having confessed this to her at the
time of their marriage engagement rather than risk anything by
hinting at the truth.  The sacrifice of his integrity before his one
all-mastering delusion seemed but a small thing, and cost his
conscience but little after the sacrifices he had already made.

The time of waking from this delusion--the cruel and the rueful
time--was not far off.  After some quiet months of married life, as
the summer was ending, and the year was getting on toward the month
of his birthday, Isaac found his wife altering toward him.  She grew
sullen and contemptuous; she formed acquaintances of the most
dangerous kind in defiance of his objections, his entreaties, and his
commands; and, worst of all, she learned, erelong, after every fresh
difference with her husband, to seek the deadly self-oblivion of
drink.  Little by little, after the first miserable discovery that
his wife was keeping company with drunkards, the shocking certainty
forced itself on Isaac that she had grown to be a drunkard herself.

He had been in a sadly desponding state for some time before the
occurrence of these domestic calamities.  His mother's health, as he
could but too plainly discern every time he went to see her at the
cottage, was failing fast, and he upbraided himself in secret as the
cause of the bodily and mental suffering she endured.  When to his
remorse on his mother's account was added the shame and misery
occasioned by the discovery of his wife's degradation, he sank under
the double trial--his face began to alter fast, and he looked what he
was, a spirit-broken man.

His mother, still struggling bravely against the illness that was
hurrying her to the grave, was the first to notice the sad alteration
in him, and the first to hear of his last worst trouble with his
wife.  She could only weep bitterly on the day when he made his
humiliating confession, but on the next occasion when he went to see
her she had taken a resolution in reference to his domestic
afflictions which astonished and even alarmed him.  He found her
dressed to go out, and on asking the reason received this answer:

"I am not long for this world, Isaac," she said, "and I shall not
feel easy on my death-bed unless I have done my best to the last to
make my son happy.  I mean to put my own fears and my own feelings
out of the question, and to go with you to your wife, and try what I
can do to reclaim her.  Give me your arm, Isaac, and let me do the
last thing I can in this world to help my son before it is too late."

He could not disobey her, and they walked together slowly toward his
miserable home.

It was only one o'clock in the afternoon when they reached the
cottage where he lived.  It was their dinner-hour, and Rebecca was in
the kitchen.  He was thus able to take his mother quietly into the
parlor, and then prepare his wife for the interview.  She had
fortunately drunk but little at that early hour, and she was less
sullen and capricious than usual.

He returned to his mother with his mind tolerably at ease.  His wife
soon followed him into the parlor, and the meeting between her and
Mrs. Scatchard passed off better than he had ventured to anticipate,
though he observed with secret apprehension that his mother,
resolutely as she controlled herself in other respects, could not
look his wife in the face when she spoke to her.  It was a relief to
him, therefore, when Rebecca began to lay the cloth.

She laid the cloth, brought in the bread-tray, and cut a slice from
the loaf for her husband, then returned to the kitchen.  At that
moment, Isaac, still anxiously watching his mother, was startled by
seeing the same ghastly change pass over her face which had altered
it so awfully on the morning when Rebecca and she first met.  Before
he could say a word, she whispered, with a look of horror:

"Take me back--home, home again, Isaac.  Come with me, and never go
back again."

He was afraid to ask for an explanation; he could only sign to her to
be silent, and help her quickly to the door.  As they passed the
bread-tray on the table she stopped and pointed to it.

"Did you see what your wife cut your bread with?" she asked, in a low
whisper.

"No, mother--I was not noticing--what was it?"

"Look!"

He did look.  A new clasp-knife, with a buckhorn handle, lay with the
loaf in the bread-tray.  He stretched out his hand shudderingly to
possess himself of it; but, at the same time, there was a noise in
the kitchen, and his mother caught at his arm.

"The knife of the dream!  Isaac, I'm faint with fear.  Take me away
before she comes back."

He was hardly able to support her.  The visible, tangible reality of
the knife struck him with a panic, and utterly destroyed any faint
doubts that he might have entertained up to this time in relation to
the mysterious dream-warning of nearly eight years before.  By a last
desperate effort, he summoned self-possession enough to help his
mother out of the house--so quietly that the "Dream-Woman" (he
thought of her by that name now) did not hear them departing from the
kitchen.

"Don't go back, Isaac--don't go back!" implored Mrs. Scatchard, as he
turned to go away, after seeing her safely seated again in her own
room.

"I must get the knife," he answered, under his breath.  His mother
tried to stop him again, but he hurried out without another word.

On his return he found that his wife had discovered their secret
departure from the house.  She had been drinking, and was in a fury
of passion.  The dinner in the kitchen was flung under the grate; the
cloth was off the parlor table.  Where was the knife?

Unwisely, he asked for it.  She was only too glad of the opportunity
of irritating him which the request afforded her.  He wanted the
knife, did he?  Could he give her a reason why?  No!  Then he should
not have it--not if he went down on his knees to ask for it.  Further
recrimination elicited the fact that she had bought it a bargain, and
that she considered it her own especial property.  Isaac saw the
uselessness of attempting to get the knife by fair means, and
determined to search for it, later in the day, in secret.  The search
was unsuccessful.  Night came on, and he left the house to walk about
the streets.  He was afraid now to sleep in the same room with her.

Three weeks passed.  Still sullenly enraged with him, she would not
give up the knife; and still that fear of sleeping in the same room
with her possessed him.  He walked about at night, or dozed in the
parlor, or sat watching by his mother's bedside.  Before the
expiration of the first week in the new month his mother died.  It
wanted then but ten days of her son's birthday.  She had longed to
live till that anniversary.  Isaac was present at her death, and her
last words in this world were addressed to him:

"Don't go back, my son, don't go back!"

He was obliged to go back, if it were only to watch his wife.
Exasperated to the last degree by his distrust of her, she had
revengefully sought to add a sting to his grief, during the last days
of his mother's illness, by declaring that she would assert her right
to attend the funeral.  In spite of all that he could do or say, she
held with wicked pertinacity to her word, and on the day appointed
for the burial forced herself--inflamed and shameless with
drink--into her husband's presence, and declared that she would walk
in the funeral procession to his mother's grave.

This last worst outrage, accompanied by all that was most insulting
in word and look, maddened him for the moment.  He struck her.

The instant the blow was dealt he repented it.  She crouched down,
silent, in a corner of the room, and eyed him steadily; it was a look
that cooled his hot blood and made him tremble.  But there was no
time now to think of a means of making atonement.  Nothing remained
but to risk the worst till the funeral was over.  There was but one
way of making sure of her.  He locked her in her bedroom.

When he came back some hours after, he found her sitting, very much
altered in look and bearing, by the bedside, with a bundle on her
lap.  She rose and faced him quietly, and spoke with a strange
stillness in her voice, a strange repose in her eyes, a strange
composure in her manner.

"No man has ever struck me twice," she said, "and my husband shall
have no second opportunity.  Set the door open and let me go.  From
this day forth we see each other no more."

Before he could answer she passed him and left the room.  He saw her
walk away up the street.

Would she return?

All that night he watched and waited, but no footstep came near the
house.  The next night, overpowered by fatigue, he lay down in bed in
his clothes, with the door locked, the key on the table, and the
candle burning.  His slumber was not disturbed.  The third night, the
fourth, the fifth, the sixth passed, and nothing happened.  He lay
down on the seventh, still in his clothes, still with the door
locked, the key on the table, and the candle burning, but easier in
his mind.

Easier in his mind, and in perfect health of body when he fell off to
sleep.  But his rest was disturbed.  He woke twice without any
sensation of uneasiness.  But the third time it was that
never-to-be-forgotten shivering of the night at the lonely inn, that
dreadful sinking pain at the heart, which once more aroused him in an
instant.

His eyes opened toward the left-hand side of the bed, and there
stood--

The Dream-Woman again?  No!  his wife; the living reality, with the
dream-spectre's face, in the dream-spectre's attitude; the fair arm
up, the knife clasped in the delicate white hand.

He sprang upon her almost at the instant of seeing her, and yet not
quickly enough to prevent her from hiding the knife.  Without a word
from him--without a cry from her--he pinioned her in a chair.  With
one hand he felt up her sleeve, and there, where the Dream-Woman had
hidden the knife, his wife had hidden it--the knife with the buckhorn
handle, that looked like new.

In the despair of that fearful moment his brain was steady, his heart
was calm.  He looked at her fixedly with the knife in his hand, and
said these last words:

"You have told me we should see each other no more, and you have come
back.  It is now my turn to go, and to go forever.  I say that we
shall see each other no more, and my word shall not be broken."

He left her, and set forth into the night.  There was a bleak wind
abroad, and the smell of recent rain was in the air.  The distant
church-clocks chimed the quarter as he walked rapidly beyond the last
houses in the suburb.  He asked the first policeman he met what hour
that was of which the quarter past had just struck.

The man referred sleepily to his watch, and answered, "Two o'clock."
Two in the morning.  What day of the month was this day that had just
begun?  He reckoned it up from the date of his mother's funeral.  The
fatal parallel was complete: it was his birthday!

Had he escaped the mortal peril which his dream foretold? or had he
only received a second warning?

As that ominous doubt forced itself on his mind, he stopped,
reflected, and turned back again toward the city.  He was still
resolute to hold to his word, and never to let her see him more; but
there was a thought now in his mind of having her watched and
followed.  The knife was in his possession; the world was before him;
but a new distrust of her--a vague, unspeakable, superstitious
dread--had come over him.

"I must know where she goes, now she thinks I have left her," he said
to himself, as he stole back wearily to the precincts of his house.

It was still dark.  He had left the candle burning in the
bed-chamber; but when he looked up to the window of the room now,
there was no light in it.  He crept cautiously to the house door.  On
going away, he remembered to have closed it; on trying it now, he
found it open.

He waited outside, never losing sight of the house, till daylight.
Then he ventured indoors--listened, and heard nothing--looked into
kitchen, scullery, parlor, and found nothing; went up, at last, into
the bedroom--it was empty.  A picklock lay on the floor, betraying
how she had gained entrance in the night, and that was the only trace
of her.

Whither had she gone?  That no mortal tongue could tell him.  The
darkness had covered her flight; and when the day broke no man could
say where the light found her.

Before leaving the house and the town forever, he gave instructions
to a friend and neighbor to sell his furniture for anything that it
would fetch, and apply the proceeds to employing the police to trace
her.  The directions were honestly followed, and the money was all
spent, but the inquiries led to nothing.  The picklock on the bedroom
floor remained the one last useless trace of the Dream-Woman.




GREEN BRANCHES

BY FIONA MACLEOD

_Fiona (which is Gaelic for Flora) Macleod was the name of one of the
most sympathetic writers in the so-called Celtic movement.  With that
intensity of feeling characteristic of the Celtic people she
succeeded in expressing much of the mystic beauty of the old Gaelic
legends._

_Upon the death of William Sharp, the author and critic, in the
spring of 1906, a long-concealed secret was brought to light:--Fiona
Macleod and William Sharp were one and the same person._



GREEN BRANCHES*

*From "The Sin-Eater."

By FIONA MACLEOD

In the year that followed the death of Manus MacCodrum, James Achanna
saw nothing of his brother Gloom.  He might have thought himself
alone in the world, of all his people, but for a letter that came to
him out of the west.  True, he had never accepted the common opinion
that his brothers had both been drowned on that night when Anne
Gillespie left Eilanmore with Manus.

In the first place, he had nothing of that inner conviction
concerning the fate of Gloom which he had concerning that of Marcus;
in the next, had he not heard the sound of the _feadan_, which no one
that he knew played except Gloom; and, for further token, was not the
tune that which he hated above all others--the "Dance of the
Dead"--for who but Gloom would be playing that, he hating it so, and
the hour being late, and no one else on Eilanmore?  It was no sure
thing that the dead had not come back; but the more he thought of it
the more Achanna believed that his sixth brother was still alive.  Of
this, however, he said nothing to any one.

It was as a man set free that, at last, after long waiting and
patient trouble with the disposal of all that was left of the Achanna
heritage, he left the island.  It was a gray memory for him.  The
bleak moorland of it, the blight that had lain so long and so often
upon the crops, the rains that had swept the isle for gray days and
gray weeks and gray months, the sobbing of the sea by day and its
dark moan by night, its dim relinquishing sigh in the calm of dreary
ebbs, its hollow, baffling roar when the storm-shadow swept up out of
the sea--one and all oppressed him, even in memory.  He had never
loved the island, even when it lay green and fragrant in the green
and white seas under white and blue skies, fresh and sweet as an Eden
of the sea.

He had ever been lonely and weary, tired of the mysterious shadow
that lay upon his folk, caring little for any of his brothers except
the eldest--long since mysteriously gone out of the ken of man--and
almost hating Gloom, who had ever borne him a grudge because of his
beauty, and because of his likeness to and reverent heed for Alison.
Moreover, ever since he had come to love Katreen Macarthur, the
daughter of Donald Macarthur who lived in Sleat of Skye, he had been
eager to live near her; the more eager as he knew that Gloom loved
the girl also, and wished for success not only for his own sake, but
so as to put a slight upon his younger brother.

So, when at last he left the island, he sailed southward gladly.  He
was leaving Eilanmore; he was bound to a new home in Skye, and
perhaps he was going to his long-delayed, long dreamed-of happiness.
True, Katreen was not pledged to him; he did not even know for sure
if she loved him.  He thought, hoped, dreamed, almost believed that
she did; but then there was her cousin Ian, who had long wooed her,
and to whom old Donald Macarthur had given his blessing.
Nevertheless, his heart would have been lighter than it had been for
long, but for two things.  First, there was the letter.  Some weeks
earlier he had received it, not recognizing the writing, because of
the few letters he had ever seen, and, moreover, as it was in a
feigned hand.  With difficulty he had deciphered the manuscript,
plain printed though it was.  It ran thus:


"Well, Sheumais, my brother, it is wondering if I am dead, you will
be.  Maybe ay, and maybe no.  But I send you this writing to let you
see that I know all you do and think of.  So you are going to leave
Eilanmore without an Achanna upon it?  And you will be going to Sleat
in Skye?  Well, let me be telling you this thing.  _Do not go_.  I
see blood there.  And there is this, too: neither you nor any man
shall take Katreen away from me.  _You_ know that; and Ian Macarthur
knows it; and Katreen knows it; and that holds whether I am alive or
dead.  I say to you: do not go.  It will be better for you, and for
all.  Ian Macarthur is away in the north-sea with the whaler-captain
who came to us at Eilanmore, and will not be back for three months
yet.  It will be better for him not to come back.  But if he comes
back he will have to reckon with the man who says that Katreen
Macarthur is his.  I would rather not have two men to speak to, and
one my brother.  It does not matter to you where I am.  I want no
money just now.  But put aside my portion for me.  Have it ready for
me against the day I call for it.  I will not be patient that day; so
have it ready for me.  In the place that I am I am content.  You will
be saying: why is my brother away in a remote place (I will say this
to you: that it is not further north than St. Kilda nor further south
than the Mull of Cantyrel), and for what reason?  That is between me
and silence.  But perhaps you think of Anne sometimes.  Do you know
that she lies under the green grass?  And of Manus MacCodrum?  They
say that he swam out into the sea and was drowned; and they whisper
of the seal-blood, though the minister is wrath with them for that.
He calls it a madness.  Well, I was there at that madness, and I
played to it on my _feadan_.  And now, Sheumais, can you be thinking
of what the tune was that I played?

  "Your brother, who waits his own day,
      "GLOOM.

"Do not be forgetting this thing: _I would rather not be playing the
'Damhsa-na-Mairbh.'_  It was an ill hour for Manus when he heard the
'Dan-nan-Ron'; it was the song of his soul, that; and yours is the
'Davsa-na-Mairv.'"


This letter was ever in his mind: this, and what happened in the
gloaming when he sailed away for Skye in the herring-smack of two men
who lived at Armadale in Sleat.  For, as the boat moved slowly out of
the haven, one of the men asked him if he was sure that no one was
left upon the island; for he thought he had seen a figure on the
rocks, waving a black scarf.  Achanna shook his head; but just then
his companion cried that at that moment he had seen the same thing.
So the smack was put about, and when she was moving slowly through
the haven again, Achanna sculled ashore in the little coggly punt.
In vain he searched here and there, calling loudly again and again.
Both men could hardly have been mistaken, he thought.  If there were
no human creature on the island, and if their eyes had not played
them false, who could it be?  The wraith of Marcus, mayhap; or might
it be the old man himself (his father), risen to bid farewell to his
youngest son, or to warn him?

It was no use to wait longer, so, looking often behind him, he made
his way to the boat again, and rowed slowly out toward the smack.

_Jerk--jerk--jerk_ across the water came, low but only too loud for
him, the opening motif of the "Damhsa-na-Mairbh." A horror came upon
him, and he drove the boat through the water so that the sea splashed
over the bows.  When he came on deck he cried in a hoarse voice to
the man next him to put up the helm, and let the smack swing to the
wind.

"There is no one there, Callum Campbell," he whispered.

"And who is it that will be making that strange music?"

"What music?"

"Sure it has stopped now, but I heard it clear, and so did Anndra
MacEwan.  It was like the sound of a reed pipe, and the tune was an
eery one at that."

"It was the Dance of the Dead."

"And who will be playing that?" asked the man, with fear in his eyes.

"No living man."

"No living man?"

"No.  I'm thinking it will be one of my brothers who was drowned
here, and by the same token that it is Gloom, for he played upon the
_feadan_.  But if not, then--then--"

The two men waited in breathless silence, each trembling with
superstitious fear; but at last the elder made a sign to Achanna to
finish.

"Then--it will be the Kelpie."

"Is there--is there one of the--cave-women here?"

"It is said; and you know of old that the Kelpie sings or plays a
strange tune to wile seamen to their death."

At that moment the fantastic, jerking music came loud and clear
across the bay.  There was a horrible suggestion in it, as if dead
bodies were moving along the ground with long jerks, and crying and
laughing wild.  It was enough; the men, Campbell and MacEwan, would
not now have waited longer if Achanna had offered them all he had in
the world.  Nor were they, or he, out of their panic haste till the
smack stood well out at sea, and not a sound could be heard from
Eilanmore.

They stood watching, silent.  Out of the dusky mass that lay in the
seaward way to the north came a red gleam.  It was like an eye
staring after them with blood-red glances.

"What is that, Achanna?" asked one of the men at last.

"It looks as though a fire had been lighted in the house up in the
island.  The door and the window must be open.  The fire must be fed
with wood, for no peats would give that flame; and there were none
lighted when I left.  To my knowing, there was no wood for burning
except the wood of the shelves and the bed."

"And who would be doing that?"

"I know of that no more than you do, Callum Campbell."

No more was said, and it was a relief to all when the last glimmer of
the light was absorbed in the darkness.

At the end of the voyage Campbell and MacEwan were well pleased to be
quit of their companion; not so much because he was moody and
distraught as because they feared that a spell was upon him--a fate
in the working of which they might become involved.  It needed no vow
of the one to the other for them to come to the conclusion that they
would never land on Eilanmore, or, if need be, only in broad
daylight, and never alone.


The days went well for James Achanna, where he made his home at
Ranza-beag, on Ranza Water in the Sleat of Skye.  The farm was small
but good, and he hoped that with help and care he would soon have the
place as good a farm as there was in all Skye.

Donald Macarthur did not let him see much of Katreen, but the old man
was no longer opposed to him.  Sheumais must wait till Ian Macarthur
came back again, which might be any day now.  For sure, James Achanna
of Ranza-beag was a very different person from the youngest of the
Achanna-folk, who held by on lonely Eilanmore; moreover, the old man
could not but think with pleasure that it would be well to see
Katreen able to walk over the whole land of Ranza, from the cairn at
the north of his own Ranza-Mòr to the burn at the south of
Ranza-beag, and know it for her own.

But Achanna was ready to wait.  Even before he had the secret word of
Katreen he knew from her beautiful dark eyes that she loved him.  As
the weeks went by they managed to meet often, and at last Katreen
told him that she loved him too, and would have none but him; but
that they must wait till Ian came back, because of the pledge given
to him by her father.  They were days of joy for him.  Through many a
hot noontide hour, through many a gloaming he went as one in a dream.
Whenever he saw a birch swaying in the wind, or a wave leaping upon
Loch Liath, that was near his home, or passed a bush covered with
wild roses, or saw the moonbeams lying white on the boles of the
pines, he thought of Katreen--his fawn for grace, and so lithe and
tall, with sunbrown face and wavy, dark mass of hair, and shadowy
eyes and rowan-red lips.  It is said that there is a god clothed in
shadow who goes to and fro among the human kind, putting silence
between lovers with his waving hands, and breathing a chill out of
his cold breath, and leaving a gulf of deep water flowing between
them because of the passing of his feet.  That shadow never came
their way.  Their love grew as a flower fed by rains and warmed by
sunlight.

When midsummer came, and there was no sign of Ian Macarthur, it was
already too late.  Katreen had been won.

During the summer months it was the custom for Katreen and two of the
farm-girls to go up Maol-Ranza, to reside at the shealing of
Cnoc-an-Fhraoch: and this because of the hill-pasture for the sheep.
Cnoc-an-Fhraoch is a round, boulder-studded hill covered with
heather, which has a precipitous corrie on each side, and in front
slopes down to Lochan Fraoch, a lochlet surrounded by dark woods.
Behind the hill, or great hillock rather, lay the shealing.  At each
week-end Katreen went down to Ranza-Mòr, and on every Monday morning
at sunrise returned to her heather-girt eyry.  It was on one of these
visits that she endured a cruel shock.  Her father told her that she
must marry some one else than Sheumais Achanna.  He had heard words
about him which made a union impossible, and indeed, he hoped that
the man would leave Ranza-beag.  In the end he admitted that what he
had heard was to the effect that Achanna was under a doom of some
kind, that he was involved in a blood feud; and, moreover, that he
was fey.  The old man would not be explicit as to the person from
whom his information came, but hinted that he was a stranger of rank,
probably a laird of the isles.  Besides this, there was word of Ian
Macarthur.  He was at Thurso, in the far north, and would be in Skye
before long, and he--her father--had written to him that he might wed
Katreen as soon as was practicable.

"Do you see that lintie yonder, father?" was her response to this.

"Ay, lass, and what about the birdeen?"

"Well, when she mates with a hawk, so will I be mating with Ian
Macarthur, but not till then."

With that she turned and left the house, and went back to
Cnoc-an-Fhraoch.  On the way she met Achanna.

It was that night that for the first time he swam across Lochan
Fraoch to meet Katreen.

The quickest way to reach the shealing was to row across the lochlet,
and then ascend by a sheep-path that wound through the hazel copses
at the base of the hill.  Fully half an hour was thus saved, because
of the steepness of the precipitous corries to right and left.  A
boat was kept for this purpose, but it was fastened to a
shore-boulder by a padlocked iron chain, the key of which was kept by
Donald Macarthur.  Latterly he had refused to let this key out of his
possession.  For one thing, no doubt, he believed he could thus
restrain Achanna from visiting his daughter.  The young man could not
approach the shealing from either side without being seen.

But that night, soon after the moon was whitening slow in the dark,
Katreen stole down to the hazel copse and awaited the coming of her
lover.  The lochan was visible from almost any point on
Cnoc-an-Fhraoch, as well as from the south side.  To cross it in a
boat unseen, if any watcher were near, would be impossible, nor could
even a swimmer hope to escape notice unless in the gloom of night or,
mayhap, in the dusk.  When, however, she saw, half-way across the
water, a spray of green branches slowly moving athwart the surface,
she knew that Sheumais was keeping his tryst.  If, perchance, any one
else saw, he or she would never guess that those derelict rowan
branches shrouded Sheumais Achanna.

It was not till the estray had drifted close to the ledge, where, hid
among the bracken and the hazel undergrowth, she awaited him, that
Katreen descried the face of her lover, as with one hand he parted
the green sprays, and stared longingly and lovingly at the figure he
could just discern in the dim, fragrant obscurity.

And as it was this night so was it many of the nights that followed.
Katreen spent the days as in a dream.  Not even the news of her
cousin Ian's return disturbed her much.

One day the inevitable meeting came.  She was at Ranza-Mòr, and when
a shadow came into the dairy where she was standing she looked up,
and saw Ian before her.  She thought he appeared taller and stronger
than ever, though still not so tall as Sheumais, who would appear
slim beside the Herculean Skye man.  But as she looked at his close
curling black hair and thick bull-neck and the sullen eyes in his
dark wind-red face, she wondered that she had ever tolerated him at
all.

He broke the ice at once.

"Tell me, Katreen, are you glad to see me back again?"

"I am glad that you are home once more safe and sound."

"And will you make it my home for me by coming to live with me, as
I've asked you again and again?"

"No: as I've told you again and again."

He gloomed at her angrily for a few moments before he resumed.

"I will be asking you this one thing, Katreen, daughter of my
father's brother: do you love that man Achanna who lives at
Ranza-beag?"

"You may ask the wind why it is from the east or the west, but it
won't tell you.  You're not the wind's master."

"If you think I will let this man take you away from me, you are
thinking a foolish thing."

"And you saying a foolisher."

"Ay?"

"Ay, sure.  What could you do, Ian Mhic Ian?  At the worst, you could
do no more than kill James Achanna.  What then?  I too would die.
You can not separate us.  I would not marry you, now, though you were
the last man in the world and I the last woman."

"You're a fool, Katreen Macarthur.  Your father has promised you to
me, and I tell you this: if you love Achanna you'll save his life
only by letting him go away from here.  I promise you he will not be
here long."

"Ay, you promise _me_; but you will not say that thing to James
Achanna's face.  You are a coward."

With a muttered oath the man turned on his heel.

"Let him beware o' me, and you, too, Katreen-mo-nighean-donn.  I
swear it by my mother's grave and by St. Martin's Cross that you will
be mine by hook or by crook."

The girl smiled scornfully.  Slowly she lifted a milk-pail.

"It would be a pity to waste the good milk, Ian-gorach, but if you
don't go it is I that will be emptying the pail on you, and then you
will be as white without as your heart is within."

"So you call me witless, do you?  _Ian-gorach_!  Well, we shall be
seeing as to that.  And as for the milk, there will be more than milk
spilt because of _you_, Katreen-donn."

From that day, though neither Sheumais nor Katreen knew of it, a
watch was set upon Achanna.

It could not be long before their secret was discovered, and it was
with a savage joy overmastering his sullen rage that Ian Macarthur
knew himself the discoverer, and conceived his double vengeance.  He
dreamed, gloatingly, on both the black thoughts that roamed like
ravenous beasts through the solitudes of his heart.  But he did not
dream that another man was filled with hate because of Katreen's
lover, another man who had sworn to make her his own, the man who,
disguised, was known in Armadale as Donald McLean, and in the north
isles would have been hailed as Gloom Achanna.

There had been steady rain for three days, with a cold, raw wind.  On
the fourth the sun shone, and set in peace.  An evening of quiet
beauty followed, warm, fragrant, dusky from the absence of moon or
star, though the thin veils of mist promised to disperse as the night
grew.

There were two men that eve in the undergrowth on the south side of
the lochlet.  Sheumais had come earlier than his wont.  Impatient for
the dusk, he could scarce await the waning of the afterglow; surely,
he thought, he might venture.  Suddenly his ears caught the sound of
cautious footsteps.  Could it be old Donald, perhaps with some
inkling of the way in which his daughter saw her lover in despite of
all; or, mayhap, might it be Ian Macarthur, tracking him as a hunter
stalking a stag by the water-pools?  He crouched, and waited.  In a
few minutes he saw Ian carefully picking his way.  The man stooped as
he descried the green branches; smiled as, with a low rustling, he
raised them from the ground.

Meanwhile yet another man watched and waited, though on the further
side of the lochan, where the hazel copses were.  Gloom Achanna half
hoped, half feared the approach of Katreen.  It would be sweet to see
her again, sweet to slay her lover before her eyes, brother to him
though he was.  But, there was the chance that she might descry him,
and, whether recognizingly or not, warn the swimmer.

So it was that he had come there before sundown, and now lay crouched
among the bracken underneath a projecting mossy ledge close upon the
water, where it could scarce be that she or any should see him.

As the gloaming deepened a great stillness reigned.  There was no
breath of wind.  A scarce audible sigh prevailed among the spires of
the heather.  The churring of a night-jar throbbed through the
darkness.  Somewhere a corncrake called its monotonous crek-craik;
the dull, harsh sound emphasizing the utter stillness.  The pinging
of the gnats hovering over and among the sedges made an incessant
murmur through the warm, sultry air.

There was a splash once as of a fish.  Then, silence.  Then a lower
but more continuous splash, or rather wash of water.  A slow susurrus
rustled through the dark.

Where he lay among the fern Gloom Achanna slowly raised his head,
stared through the shadows and listened intently.  If Katreen were
waiting there she was not near.

Noiselessly he slid into the water.  When he rose it was under a
clump of green branches.  These he had cut and secured three hours
before.  With his left hand he swam slowly, or kept his equipoise in
the water; with his right he guided the heavy rowan bough.  In his
mouth were two objects, one long and thin and dark, the other with an
occasional glitter as of a dead fish.

His motion was scarcely perceptible.  None the less he was near the
middle of the loch almost as soon as another clump of green branches.
Doubtless the swimmer beneath it was confident that he was now safe
from observation.

The two clumps of green branches drew nearer.  The smaller seemed a
mere estray, a spray blown down by the recent gale.  But all at once
the larger clump jerked awkwardly and stopped.  Simultaneously a
strange, low strain of music came from the other.

The strain ceased.  The two clumps of green branches remained
motionless.  Slowly, at last, the larger moved forward.  It was too
dark for the swimmer to see if any one lay hid behind the smaller.
When he reached it he thrust aside the leaves.

It was as though a great salmon leaped.  There was a splash, and a
narrow, dark body shot through the gloom.  At the end of it something
gleamed.  Then suddenly there was a savage struggle.  The inanimate
green branches tore this way and that, and surged and swirled.
Gasping cries came from the leaves.  Again and again the gleaming
thing leaped.  At the third leap an awful scream shrilled through the
silence.  The echo of it wailed thrice, with horrible distinctness,
in the corrie beyond Cnoc-an-Fhraoch.  Then, after a faint splashing,
there was silence once more.  One clump of green branches drifted
slowly up the lochlet.  The other moved steadily toward the place
whence, a brief while before, it had stirred.

Only one thing lived in the heart of Gloom Achanna--the joy of his
exultation.  He had killed his brother Sheumais.  He had always hated
him because of his beauty; of late he had hated him because he had
stood between him, Gloom, and Katreen Macarthur--because he had
become her lover.  They were all dead now except himself, all the
Achannas.  He was "Achanna."  When the day came that he would go back
to Galloway, there would be a magpie on the first birk, and a
screaming jay on the first rowan, and a croaking raven on the first
fir; ay, he would be their suffering, though they knew nothing of him
meanwhile!  He would be Achanna of Achanna again.  Let those who
would stand in his way beware.  As for Katreen: perhaps he would take
her there, perhaps not.  He smiled.

These thoughts were the wandering fires in his brain while he slowly
swam shoreward under the floating green branches, and as he
disengaged himself from them and crawled upward through the bracken.
It was at this moment that a third man entered the water from the
further shore.

Prepared as he was to come suddenly upon Katreen, Gloom was startled
when, in a place of dense shadow, a hand touched his shoulder, and
her voice whispered:

"Sheumais, Sheumais!"

The next moment she was in his arms.  He could feel her heart beating
against his side.

"What was it, Sheumais?  What was that awful cry?" she whispered.

For answer he put his lips to hers, and kissed her again and again.

The girl drew back.  Some vague instinct warned her.

"What is it, Sheumais?  Why don't you speak?"

He drew her close again.

"Pulse of my heart, it is I who love you, I who love you best of all;
it is I, Gloom Achanna!"

With a cry she struck him full in the face.  He staggered, and in
that moment she freed herself.

"You _coward_!"

"Katreen, I--"

"Come no nearer.  If you do, it will be the death of you!"

"The death o' me!  Ah, bonnie fool that you are, and is it you that
will be the death o' me?"

"Ay, Gloom Achanna, for I have but to scream and Sheumais will be
here, an' he would kill you like a dog if he knew you did me harm."

"Ah, but if there were no Sheumais, or any man to come between me an'
my will!"

"Then there would be a woman!  Ay, if you overbore me I would
strangle you with my hair, or fix my teeth in your false throat!"

"I was not for knowing you were such a wild-cat; but I'll tame you
yet, my lass!  Aha, wild-cat!"  And as he spoke he laughed low.

"It is a true word, Gloom of the black heart.  I am a wild-cat, and,
like a wild-cat, I am not to be seized by a fox; and that you will be
finding to your cost, by the holy St. Bridget!  But now, off with
you, brother of my man!"

"Your man--ha! ha!"

"Why do you laugh?"

"Sure, I am laughing at a warm, white lass like yourself having a
dead man as your lover!"

"A--dead--man?"

No answer came.  The girl shook with a new fear.  Slowly she drew
closer, till her breath fell warm against the face of the other.  He
spoke at last:

"Ay, a dead man."

"It is a lie."

"Where would you be that you were not hearing his good-by?  I'm
thinking it was loud enough!"

"It is a lie--it is a lie!"

"No, it is no lie.  Sheumais is cold enough now.  He's low among the
weeds by now.  Ay, by now: down there in the lochan."

"_What_--you, _you devil_!  Is it for killing your own brother you
would be?"

"I killed no one.  He died his own way.  Maybe the cramp took him.
Maybe--maybe a kelpie gripped him.  I watched.  I saw him beneath the
green branches.  He was dead before he died.  I saw it in the white
face o' him.  Then he sank.  He's dead.  Sheumais is dead.  Look
here, girl, I've always loved you.  I swore the oath upon you.
You're mine.  Sure, you're mine now, Katreen!  It is loving you I am!
It will be a south wind for you from this day, muirnean mochree!  See
here, I'll show you how I--"

"Back--back--_murderer_!"

"Be stopping that foolishness now, Katreen Macarthur!  By the Book, I
am tired of it.  I am loving you, and it's having you for mine I am!
And if you won't come to me like the dove to its mate, I'll come to
you like the hawk to the dove!"

With a spring he was upon her.  In vain she strove to beat him back.
His arms held her as a stoat grips a rabbit.

He pulled her head back, and kissed her throat till the strangulating
breath sobbed against his ear.  With a last despairing effort she
screamed the name of the dead man: "_Sheumais!  Sheumais!
Sheumais!_"  The man who struggled with her laughed.

"Ay, call away!  The herrin' will be coming through the bracken as
soon as Sheumais comes to your call!  Ah, it is mine you are now,
Katreen!  He's dead and cold--an' you'd best have a living man--an'--"

She fell back, her balance lost in the sudden releasing.  What did it
mean?  Gloom still stood there, but as one frozen.  Through the
darkness she saw, at last, that a hand gripped his shoulder; behind
him a black mass vaguely obtruded.

For some moments there was absolute silence.  Then a hoarse voice
came out of the dark:

"You will be knowing now who it is, Gloom Achanna!"

The voice was that of Sheumais, who lay dead in the lochan.  The
murderer shook as in a palsy.  With a great effort, slowly he turned
his head.  He saw a white splatch, the face of the corpse; in this
white splatch flamed two burning eyes, the eyes of the soul of the
brother whom he had slain.

He reeled, staggered as a blind man, and, free now of that awful
clasp, swayed to and fro as one drunken.

Slowly Sheumais raised an arm and pointed downward through the wood
toward the lochan.  Still pointing, he moved swiftly forward.

With a cry like a beast, Gloom Achanna swung to one side, stumbled,
rose, and leaped into the darkness.

For some minutes Sheumais and Katreen stood, silent, apart, listening
to the crashing sound of his flight--the race of the murderer against
the pursuing shadow of the Grave.




A BEWITCHED SHIP

BY W. CLARK RUSSELL

_William Clark Russell, the son of Henry Russell, the composer of
"Cheer, Boys, Cheer" and other songs, was born in New York in 1844.
At the age of thirteen he entered the British merchant service and
followed the sea till twenty-one, after which he devoted himself to
story-writing.  It is a common-place of criticism to say that no one
writes better sea stories than the author of the famous "Wreck of the
Grosvenor."  Since 1890 he has lived at Bath, in the west of England.
The present story is taken from a volume entitled "On the Fo'k'sle
Head."_



A BEWITCHED SHIP

By W. CLARK RUSSELL

"About ten years ago," began my friend, Captain Green, "I went as
second mate of a ship named the 'Ocean King.'  She'd been an old
Indiaman in her time, and had a poop and topgallant forecastle,
though alterations had knocked some of the dignity out of her.  Her
channels had been changed into plates with dead-eyes above the rail,
and the eye missed the spread of the lower rigging that it naturally
sought in looking at a craft with a square stern and windows in it,
and checkered sides rounding out into curves, that made a complete
tub of the old hooker.  Yet, spite of changes, the old-fashioned
grace would break through.  She looked like a lady who has seen
better days, who has got to do work which servants did for her in the
times when she was well off, but who, let her set her hand to what
she will, makes you see that the breeding and the instincts are still
there, and that she's as little to be vulgarized by poverty and its
coarse struggles as she could be made a truer lady than she is by
money.  Ships, like human beings, have their careers, and the close
of some of them is strange, and sometimes hard, I think.

"The 'Ocean King' had been turned into a collier, and I went second
mate of her when she was full up with coal for a South African port.
Yet, this ship, that was now carrying one of the dirtiest cargoes you
could name, barring phosphate manure, had been reckoned in her day a
fine passenger vessel, a noble Indiaman indeed--her tonnage was
something over eleven hundred--with a cuddy fitted up royally.  Many
a freight of soldiers had she carried round the Cape, many an old
nabob had she conveyed--ay, and Indian potentates, who smoked out of
jeweled hookahs, and who were waited upon by crowds of black servants
in turbans and slippers.  I used to moralize over her just as I would
over a tomb, when I had the watch and was alone and could let my
thoughts run loose.

"The sumptuous cabin trappings were all gone, and I seemed to smell
coal in the wind, even when my head was over the weather side, and
when the breeze that blew along came fresh across a thousand miles of
sea; but there was a good deal of the fittings left--fittings which,
I don't doubt, made the newspapers give a long account of this 'fine,
great ship' when she was launched--quite enough of them to enable a
man to reconstruct a picture of the cuddy of the 'Ocean King' as it
was in the days of her glory, when the soft oil-lamps shone bright on
the draped tables and sparkled on silver and glass; when the old
skipper, sitting with the mizzenmast behind him, would look, with his
red face and white hair, down the rows of ladies and gentlemen eating
and drinking, stewards running about, trays hanging from the deck
above, and globes full of gold-fish swinging to the roll of the
vessel as she swung stately, with her stunsails hanging out, over the
long blue swell, wrinkled by the wind.  The ship is still afloat.
Where are the people she carried?  The crews who have worked her?
The captains who have commanded her?  There is nothing that should be
fuller of ghosts than an old ship; and I very well remember that when
I first visited the 'Victory,' at Portsmouth, and descended into her
cockpit, what I saw was not a well-preserved and cleanly length of
massive deck, but groups of wounded and bleeding and dying men
littering the dark floor, and the hatchway shadowed by groaning
figures handed below, while the smell of English, French, and Spanish
gunpowder, even down there, was so strong--phew!  I could have spat
the flavor out!

"Well, the old 'Ocean King' had once upon a time been said to be
haunted.  She had certainly been long enough afloat to own a hundred
stories, and she was so stanch and true that if ever a superstition
got into her there was no chance of its getting out again.  I only
remember one of these yarns; it was told to me by the dockmaster, who
had been at sea for many years, was an old man, and knew the history
of all such craft as the 'Ocean King.'  He said that, in '51, I think
it was, there had been a row among the crew: an Italian sailor
stabbed an Englishman, who bled to death.  To avenge the Englishman's
death the rest of the crew, who were chiefly English, thrust the
Italian into the forepeak and let him lie there in darkness.  When he
was asked for they reported that he had fallen overboard, and this
seems to have been believed.  Whether the crew meant to starve him or
not is not certain; but, after he had been in the forepeak three or
four days, a fellow going behind the galley out of the way of the
wind to light his pipe--it being then four bells in the first
watch--came running into the forecastle, with his hair on end, and
the sweat pouring off his face, swearing he had seen the Italian's
ghost.  This frightened the men prettily; some of them went down into
the forepeak, and found the Italian lying there dead, with a score of
rats upon him, which scampered off when the men dropped below.
During all the rest of the voyage his ghost was constantly seen,
sometimes at the lee wheel, sometimes astride of the flying-jibboom.
What was the end of it--I mean, whether the men confessed the murder,
and, if so, what became of them--the dockmaster said he didn't know.
But, be this as it may, I discovered shortly after we had begun our
voyage that the crew had got to hear of this story, and the chief
mate said it had been brought aboard by the carpenter, who had picked
it up from some of the dockyard laborers.

"I well recollect two uncomfortable circumstances; we sailed on a
Friday, and the able and ordinary seamen were thirteen in number, the
idlers and ourselves aft bringing up the ship's company to nineteen
souls! when, I suppose, in her prime the 'Ocean King' never left port
short of seventy or eighty seamen, not to mention stewards, cooks,
cooks' mates, butcher, butcher's mate, baker, and the rest of them.
But double topsail yards were now in; besides, I understood that the
vessel's masts had been reduced and her yards shortened, and we
carried stump fore and mizzen-topgallant masts.

"All being ready, a tug got hold of our tow-rope, and away we went
down the river and out to sea.

"I don't believe myself that any stories which had been told the men
about the ship impressed them much.  Sailors are very superstitious,
but they are not to be scared till something has happened to frighten
them.  Your merely telling them that there's a ghost aboard the ship
they're in won't alarm them till they've caught sight of the ghost.
But once let a man say to the others: 'There's a bloomin' sperrit in
this ship.  Lay your head agin the forehatch, and you'll hear him
gnashing his teeth and rattlin' his chains,' and then let another man
go and listen, and swear, and perhaps very honestly, that he 'heerd
the noises plain,' and you'll have all hands in a funk, talking in
whispers, and going aloft in the dark nervously.

"In our ship nothing happened for some days.  We were deep and slow,
and rolled along solemnly, the sea falling away from the vessel's
powerful round bows as from a rock.  Pile what we could upon her,
with tacks aboard, staysails drawing, and the wind hitting her best
sailing point, we could seldom manage to get more than seven knots
out of her.  One night I had the first watch.  It was about two
bells.  There was a nice wind, sea smooth, and a red moon crawling up
over our starboard beam.  We were under all plain sail, leaning away
from the wind a trifle, and the water washed along under the bends in
lines through which the starlight ran glimmering.

"I was thinking over the five or six months' voyages which old wagons
after the pattern of this ship took in getting to India, when, seeing
a squall coming along, I sung out for hands to stand by the
main-royal and mizzen-topgallant halliards.  It drove down dark, and
not knowing what was behind I ordered the main-royal to be clewed up
and furled.  Two youngsters went aloft.  By the time they were on the
yard the squall thinned, but I fancied there was another bearing
down, and thought it best to let the ordinary seamen roll the sail
up.  On a sudden down they both trotted, hand over hand, leaving the
sail flapping in the clutch of the clew-lines.

"I roared out: 'What d'ye mean by coming down before you've furled
that sail?'

"They stood together in the main rigging, and one of them answered:
'Please, sir, there's a ghost somewhere up aloft on the
foretopsail-yard.'

"'A ghost, you fool!' I cried.

"'Yes, sir,' he answered.  'He says: "Jim, your mother wants yer."  I
says: "What?" and he says: "Your mother wants yer," in the hollowest
o' voices.  Dick here heard it.  There's no one aloft forrard, sir.'

"I sung out to them to jump aloft again, and finding that they didn't
move I made a spring, on which they dropped like lightning on deck,
and began to beg and pray of me in the eagerest manner not to send
them aloft, as they were too frightened to hold on.  Indeed, the
fellow named Jim actually began to shiver and cry when I threatened
him; so as the royal had to be furled I sent an able seaman aloft,
who, after rolling up the sail, came down and said that no voice had
called to him, and that he rather reckoned it was a bit of skylarking
on the part of the boys to get out of stowing the sail.  However, I
noticed that the man was wonderfully quick over the job, and that
afterward the watch on deck stood talking in low voices in the waist.

"Jim was a fool of a youth, but Dick was a smart lad, aged about
nineteen, and good-looking, with a lively tongue, and I heard
afterward that he could spin a yarn to perfection all out of his
imagination.  I called him to me, and asked him if he had really
heard a voice, and he swore he had.

"'Did it say,' said I, 'Jim, your mother wants you?'

"'Ay, sir,' he answered, with a bit of a shudder, 'as plain as you
yourself say it.  It seemed to come off the foretop-gallant yard,
where I fancied I see something dark a-moving, but I was too
frightened to take particular notice.'

"Well, it was not long after this, about eleven o'clock in the
morning, that, the captain being on deck, the cook steps out of the
galley, comes walking along the poop, and going up to the skipper
touches his cap, and stands looking at him.

"'What d'ye want?' said the captain, eying him as if he took him to
be mad.

"'Didn't you call, sir?' says the cook.

"'Call!' cries the skipper.  'Certainly not.'

"The man looked stupid with surprise, and, muttering something to
himself, went forward.  Ten minutes after he came up again to the
skipper, and says: 'Yes, sir!' as a man might who answers to a call.
The skipper began to swear at him, and called him a lunatic, and so
on; but the man, finding he was wrong again, grew white, and swore
that if he was on his death-bed he'd maintain that the captain had
called him twice.

"The skipper, who was a rather nervous man, turned to me, and said:
'What do you make of this, Mr. Green?  I can't doubt the cook's word.
Who's calling him in my voice?'

"'Oh, it's some illusion, sir,' said I, feeling puzzled for all that.

"But the cook, with the tears actually standing in his eyes, declared
it was no illusion; he'd know the captain's voice if it was nine
miles off.  And he then walked in a dazed way toward the forecastle,
singing out that whether the voice he had heard belonged to a ghost
or a Christian man, it might go on calling 'Cook!' for the next
twenty years without his taking further notice of it.  This thing,
coming so soon after the call to Jim that had so greatly alarmed the
two ordinary seamen, made a great impression on the crew; and I never
regret anything more than that my position should have prevented me
from getting into their confidence, and learning their thoughts, for
there is no doubt I should have stowed away memories enough to serve
me for many a hearty laugh in after years.

"A few days rolled by without anything particular happening.  One
night it came to my turn to have the first watch.  It was a quiet
night, with wind enough to keep the sails still while the old ship
went drowsily rolling along her course to the African port.  Suddenly
I heard a commotion forward, and fearing that some accident had
happened, I called out to know what the matter was.  A voice
answered: 'Ghost or no ghost, there's somebody a-talking in the
forehold; come and listen, sir.'  The silence that followed suggested
a good deal of alarm.  I sang out as I approached the men, 'Perhaps
there's a stowaway below.'

"'It's no living voice,' was the reply; 'it sounds as if it comes
from a skelington.'

"I found a crowd of men standing in awed postures near the hatch, and
the most frightened of all looked to me to be the ordinary seaman
Dick, who had backed away on the other side of the hatch, and stood
looking on, leaning with his hands on his knees, and staring as if he
were fascinated.  I waited a couple or three minutes, which, in a
business of this kind, seems a long time, and, hearing nothing, I was
going to ridicule the men for their nervousness, when a hollow voice
under the hatch said distinctly, 'It's a terrible thing to be a ghost
and not be able to get out.'

"I was greatly startled, and ran aft to tell the captain, who agreed
with me that there must be a stowaway in the hold, and that he had
gone mad.  We both went forward, and the hatch was lifted, and we
looked on top of the coal; and I was then about to ask some of the
men to join me in a search in the forepeak, for upon my word I had no
taste single-handed for a job of that kind at such a moment, when the
voice said, 'There's no use looking, you'll never find me.  I'm not
to be seen.'

"'Confound me!' cried the skipper, polishing his forehead with a
pocket-handkerchief, 'if ever I heard of such a thing.  I'll tell you
what it is,' he shouted, looking into the hatch, 'dead men can't
talk, and so, as you're bound to be alive, you'd better come up out
of that, and smartly too--d'ye hear?--or you'll find this the worst
attempt at skylarking that was ever made.'

"There was a short silence, and you'd see all hands straining their
ears, for there was light enough for that, given out by a lantern one
of the men held.

"'You couldn't catch me because you couldn't see me,' said the voice
in a die-away tone, and this time it came from the direction of the
main hatch, as though it had flitted aft.

"'Well,' says the captain, 'may I be jiggered!' and without another
word he walked away on to the poop.

"I told the men to clap the hatches on again, and they did this in
double-quick time, evidently afraid that the ghost might pop up out
of the hold if they didn't mind their eye.

"All this made us very superstitious, from the captain down to the
boys.  We talked it over in the cabin, and the mate was incredulous,
and disposed to ridicule me.

"'Any way,' said he, 'it's strange that this voice is only heard in
your watch.  It's never favored me with any remarks.  The creaking
and groaning of an old wooden ship is often like spoken words, and
what you've been hearing may be nothing but a deception of the ear.'

"'A deception in your eye,' cried the skipper.  'The timbers of an
old wooden ship may strain and creak in the Dutch language, but hang
me if they ever talked good, sensible English.  However, I'm not
going to worry.  For my part,' said he, with a nervous glance around
him, 'I don't believe in ghosts; whatever it is that's talking in the
hold may go on jawing, so long as he sticks to that, and don't
frighten the men with an ugly mug, nor come upon us for a man's
allowance.'

"'If it's anybody's ghost,' said I, 'it must be the Italian's, the
chap that was starved in the forepeak.'

"'I doubt that,' said the skipper.  'I didn't detect anything foreign
in what he said.  To my ear it sounded more like Whitechapel than
Italiano.'

"Well, for another week we heard little more of the ghost.  It's true
that one middle watch a chap I had sent aloft to loose the main-royal
had hardly stepped out of the lower rigging, after lingering in the
crosstrees to overhaul his clew-lines, when he comes rushing up to me
and cries out, 'I've been hailed from aloft, sir! a voice has just
sung out, "Tommy, jump aloft again that I may have a good look at
you!"'

"'Who's up there?' I asked him, staring into the gloom where the mast
and yards went towering.

"'There's no one up there, sir; I'll swear it.  I was bound to see
him had any one been there,' he answered, evidently very much
frightened.

"It occurred to me that some one of the crew might be lying hid in
the top, and that if I could catch him I might find out who the ghost
was.  So I jumped into the rigging and trotted aloft, keeping my eye
on the lee rigging, to make sure that no one descended by it.  I
gained the top, but nobody was there.  I mounted to the crosstrees,
but the deuce a sign of any one could I see.  I came down, feeling
both foolish and scared; for you see I had heard the voice myself in
the hold; there was no question that there was a voice, belonging to
nobody knew what, knocking about the ship, and consequently it was
now impossible to help believing a man when he said he heard it.

"However, it was necessary to keep the men in heart, and this was not
to be done by captain and mates appearing scared; so I reasoned a bit
with the man, told him that there were no such things as ghosts, that
a voice was bound to come from a live person, because a spectre
couldn't possibly have lungs, those organs being of a perishable
nature, and then sent him forward, but no easier in his mind, I
suspect, than I was.  Anyhow, I was glad when eight bells struck and
it was my turn to go below.  But, as I have said, nothing much came
of this--at least, nothing that reached my ears.  But not many nights
following the ship lay becalmed--there wasn't a breath of air, and
the sea lay smooth as polished jet.  This time I had the middle watch
again.  I was walking quietly up and down the poop, on the lookout
for a deeper shadow upon the sea to indicate the approach of wind,
when a man came up the ladder and said, 'There's some one a-talking
to the ship under the bows.'

"'Are you awake?' said I.

"'Heaven help me, as I stand here, sir,' exclaimed the fellow,
solemnly, 'if that there woice which talked in the hold t'other day
ain't now over the side.'

"I ran forward, and found most of the watch huddled together near the
starboard cathead.  I peered over, and there was a dead silence.

"'What are you looking over that side for?  I'm here!' said a thin,
faint voice, that seemed more in the air than in the sea.

"There!' exclaimed one of the seamen, in a hoarse whisper, 'that's
the third time.  Whichever side we look, he's on the other.'

"'But there must be some one in the water,' said another man.
'Anybody see his houtline? cuss me if I couldn't swear I see a chap
swimmin' just now.'

"'No, no,' answered some one, gruffly, 'nothing but phosphorus, Joe,
and the right sort o' stuff, too, for if this ain't old Nick--'

"'You're a liar, Sam!' came the voice clear, and, as one could swear,
plain from over the side.

"There was a general recoil, and a sort of groan ran among the men.

"At the same moment I collared a figure standing near me, and slued
him round to bring his face fair to the starlight, clear of the
staysail.  'Come you along with me, Master Dick,' said I; and I
marched him off the forecastle, along the main deck, and up on to the
poop.  'So _you're_ the ghost, eh?' said I.  'Why, to have kept your
secret you should have given my elbow a wider berth.  No wonder the
voice only makes observations in my watch.  You're too lazy, I
suppose, to leave your hammock to try your wonderful power on the
mate, eh?  Now see here,' said I, finding him silent, and noticing
how white his face glimmered to the stars, 'I know you're the man, so
you'd better confess.  Own the truth and I'll keep your secret,
providing you belay all further tricks of the same kind; deny that
you're the ghost and I'll speak to the captain and set the men upon
you.'

"This fairly frightened him.  'Well, sir, it's true; I'm the voice,
sir; but for God's sake keep the secret, sir.  The men 'ud have my
life if they found out that it was me as scared them.'

"This confession was what I needed, for though when standing pretty
close to him on the forecastle I could have sworn that it was he who
uttered the words which perplexed and awed the sailors, yet so
perfect was the deception, so fine, in short, was his skill as a
ventriloquist that, had he stoutly denied and gone on denying that he
was the 'voice,' I should have believed him and continued sharing in
the wonder and superstition of the crew.  I kept his secret as I
promised; but, somehow or other, it leaked out in time that he could
deceive the ear by apparently pitching his voice among the rigging,
or under the deck, or over the side, though the discovery was not
made until the 'ghost' had for a long time ceased to trouble the
ship's company, and until the men's superstitious awe had faded
somewhat, and they had recovered their old cheerfulness.  We then
sent for Dick to the cabin, where he gave us a real entertainment as
a ventriloquist, imitating all sorts of animals, and producing sounds
as of women in distress and men singing out for help, in the berths;
indeed, such was the skill that I'd often see the skipper and mate
turning startled to look in the direction whence the voices proceeded.

"He made his peace with the men by amusing them in the same way; so
that, instead of getting the rope's ending aft and the pummeling
forward which he deserved, he ended as a real and general favorite,
and one of the most amusing fellows that a man ever was shipmate
with.  I used to tell him that if he chose to perform ashore, he was
sure to make plenty of money, since such ventriloquial powers as his
was the rarest thing in the world; and I'd sometimes fancy he meant
to take my advice.  But whether he died or kept on going to sea I
don't know, for after he left the ship I never saw nor heard of him
again."




THE SIGNAL-MAN

BY CHARLES DICKENS

_Charles Dickens (born 1812, died 1870) has been acknowledged as the
creator of the modern novel.  Says David Christie Murray, a popular
novelist: "There is not a writer of fiction at this hour, in any land
where fiction is a recognized trade or art, who is not, whether he
knows it and owns it, or no, largely influenced by Dickens."_

_"The Signal-Man" has been frequently selected by critics as an
example of Dickens's ability with the short-story form._



THE SIGNAL-MAN

By CHARLES DICKENS

"Halloa!  Below there!"

When he heard a voice thus calling to him, he was standing at the
door of his box, with a flag in his hand, furled round its short
pole.  One would have thought, considering the nature of the ground,
that he could not have doubted from what quarter the voice came; but
instead of looking up to where I stood on the top of the steep
cutting nearly over his head, he turned himself about, and looked
down the Line.  There was something remarkable in his manner of doing
so, though I could not have said for my life what.  But I know it was
remarkable enough to attract my notice, even though his figure was
foreshortened and shadowed, down in the deep trench, and mine was
high above him, so steeped in the glow of an angry sunset that I had
shaded my eyes with my hand before I saw him at all.

"Halloa!  Below!"

From looking down the Line, he turned himself about again, and,
raising his eyes, saw my figure high above him.

"Is there any path by which I can come down and speak to you?"

He looked up at me without replying, and I at him without pressing
him too soon with a repetition of my idle question.  Just then there
came a vague vibration in the earth and air, quickly changing into a
violent pulsation, and an oncoming rush that caused me to start back,
as though it had force to draw me down.  When such vapor as rose to
my height from this rapid train had passed me, and was skimming away
over the landscape, I looked down again, and saw him refurling the
flag he had shown while the train went by.

I repeated my inquiry.  After a pause, during which he seemed to
regard me with fixed attention, he motioned with his rolled-up flag
toward a point on my level, some two or three hundred yards distant.
I called down to him, "All right!" and made for that point.  There,
by dint of looking closely about me, I found a rough zigzag
descending path notched out, which I followed.

The cutting was extremely deep, and unusually precipitate.  It was
made through a clammy stone, that became oozier and wetter as I went
down.  For these reasons, I found the way long enough to give me time
to recall a singular air of reluctance or compulsion with which he
had pointed out the path.

When I came down low enough upon the zigzag descent to see him again,
I saw that he was standing between the rails on the way by which the
train had lately passed, in an attitude as if he were waiting for me
to appear.  He had his left hand at his chin, and that left elbow
rested on his right hand, crossed over his breast.  His attitude was
one of such expectation and watchfulness that I stopped a moment,
wondering at it.

I resumed my downward way, and stepping out upon the level of the
railroad, and drawing nearer to him, saw that he was a dark, sallow
man, with a dark beard and rather heavy eyebrows.  His post was in as
solitary and dismal a place as ever I saw.  On either side, a
dripping-wet wall of jagged stone, excluding all view but a strip of
sky; the perspective one way only a crooked prolongation of this
great dungeon; the shorter perspective in the other direction
terminating in a gloomy red light, and the gloomier entrance to a
black tunnel, in whose massive architecture there was a barbarous,
depressing, and forbidding air.  So little sunlight ever found its
way to this spot that it had an earthy, deadly smell; and so much
cold wind rushed through it that it struck chill to me, as if I had
left the natural world.

Before he stirred, I was near enough to him to have touched him.  Not
even then removing his eyes from mine, he stepped back one step, and
lifted his hand.

This was a lonesome post to occupy (I said), and it had riveted my
attention when I looked down from up yonder.  A visitor was a rarity,
I should suppose; not an unwelcome rarity, I hoped?  In me, he merely
saw a man who had been shut up within narrow limits all his life, and
who, being at last set free, had a newly-awakened interest in these
great works.  To such purpose I spoke to him; but I am far from sure
of the terms I used; for, besides that I am not happy in opening any
conversation, there was something in the man that daunted me.

He directed a most curious look toward the red light near the
tunnel's mouth, and looked all about it, as if something were missing
from it, and then looked at me.

That light was part of his charge?  Was it not?

He answered in a low voice: "Don't you know it is?"

The monstrous thought came into my mind, as I perused the fixed eyes
and the saturnine face, that this was a spirit, not a man.  I have
speculated since, whether there may have been infection in his mind.

In my turn, I stepped back.  But in making the action, I detected in
his eyes some latent fear of me.  This put the monstrous thought to
flight.

"You look at me," I said, forcing a smile, "as if you had a dread of
me."

"I was doubtful," he returned, "whether I had seen you before."

"Where?"

He pointed to the red light he had looked at.

"There?" I said.

Intently watchful of me, he replied (but without sound), "Yes."

"My good fellow, what should I do there?  However, be that as it may,
I never was there, you may swear."

"I think I may," he rejoined.  "Yes; I am sure I may,"

His manner cleared, like my own.  He replied to my remarks with
readiness, and in well-chosen words.  Had he much to do there?  Yes;
that was to say, he had enough responsibility to bear; but exactness
and watchfulness were what was required of him, and of actual
work--manual labor--he had next to none.  To change that signal, to
trim those lights, and to turn this iron handle now and then, was all
he had to do under that head.  Regarding those many long and lonely
hours of which I seemed to make so much, he could only say that the
routine of his life had shaped itself into that form, and he had
grown used to it.  He had taught himself a language down here--if
only to know by sight, and to have formed his own crude ideas of its
pronunciation, could be called learning it.  He had also worked at
fractions and decimals, and tried a little algebra; but he was, and
had been as a boy, a poor hand at figures.  Was it necessary for him
when on duty always to remain in that channel of damp air, and could
he never rise into the sunshine from between those high stone walls?
Why, that depended upon times and circumstances.  Under some
conditions there would be less upon the Line than under others, and
the same held good as to certain hours of the day and night.  In
bright weather, he did choose occasions for getting a little above
these lower shadows; but, being at all times liable to be called by
his electric bell, and at such times listening for it with redoubled
anxiety, the relief was less than I would suppose.

He took me into his box, where there was a fire, a desk for an
official book in which he had to make certain entries, a telegraphic
instrument with its dial, face, and needles, and the little bell of
which he had spoken.  On my trusting that he would excuse the remark
that he had been well educated, and (I hoped I might say without
offense), perhaps educated above that station, he observed that
instances of slight incongruity in such wise would rarely be found
wanting among large bodies of men; that he had heard it was so in
workhouses, in the police force, even in that last desperate
resource, the army; and that he knew it was so, more or less, in any
great railway staff.  He had been, when young (if I could believe it,
sitting in that hut--he scarcely could), a student of natural
philosophy, and had attended lectures; but he had run wild, misused
his opportunities, gone down, and never risen again.  He had no
complaint to offer about that.  He had made his bed, and he lay upon
it.  It was far too late to make another.

All that I have here condensed he said in a quiet manner, with his
grave dark regards divided between me and the fire.  He threw in the
word, "Sir," from time to time, and especially when he referred to
his youth--as though to request me to understand that he claimed to
be nothing but what I found him.  He was several times interrupted by
the little bell, and had to read off messages, and send replies.
Once he had to stand without the door, and display a flag as a train
passed, and make some verbal communication to the driver.  In the
discharge of his duties, I observed him to be remarkably exact and
vigilant, breaking off his discourse at a syllable, and remaining
silent until what he had to do was done.

In a word, I should have set this man down as one of the safest of
men to be employed in that capacity, but for the circumstance that
while he was speaking to me he twice broke off with a fallen color,
turned his face toward the little bell when it did not ring, opened
the door of the hut (which was kept shut to exclude the unhealthy
damp), and looked out toward the red light near the mouth of the
tunnel.  On both of those occasions, he came back to the fire with
the inexplicable air upon him which I had remarked, without being
able to define, when we were so far asunder.

Said I, when I rose to leave him, "You almost make me think that I
have met with a contented man."

(I am afraid I must acknowledge that I said it to lead him on.)

"I believe I used to be so," he rejoined, in the low voice in which
he had first spoken; "but I am troubled, sir, I am troubled."

He would have recalled the words if he could.  He had said them,
however, and I took them up quickly.

"With what?  What is your trouble?"

"It is very difficult to impart, sir.  It is very, very difficult to
speak of.  If ever you make me another visit, I will try to tell you."

"But I expressly intend to make you another visit.  Say, when shall
it be?"

"I go off early in the morning, and I shall be on again at ten
to-morrow night, sir."

"I will come at eleven."

He thanked me, and went out at the door with me.  "I'll show my white
light, sir," he said, in his peculiar low voice, "till you have found
the way up.  When you have found it, don't call out!  And when you
are at the top, don't call out!"

His manner seemed to make the place strike colder to me, but I said
no more than, "Very well."

"And when you come down to-morrow night, don't call out!  Let me ask
you a parting question.  What made you cry, 'Halloa!  Below there!'
to-night?"

"Heaven knows," said I.  "I cried something to that effect--"

"Not to that effect, sir.  Those were the very words.  I know them
well."

"Admit those were the very words.  I said them, no doubt, because I
saw you below."

"For no other reason?"

"What other reason could I possibly have?"

"You had no feeling that they were conveyed to you in any
supernatural way?"

"No."

He wished me good-night, and held up his light.  I walked by the side
of the down Line of rails (with a very disagreeable sensation of a
train coming behind me) until I found the path.  It was easier to
mount than to descend, and I got back to my inn without any adventure.

Punctual to my appointment, I placed my foot on the first notch of
the zigzag next night, as the distant clocks were striking eleven.
He was waiting for me at the bottom, with his white light on.  "I
have not called out," I said, when we came close together; "may I
speak now?"

"By all means, sir."

"Good-night, then, and here's my hand."

"Good-night, sir, and here's mine."

With that we walked side by side to his box, entered it, closed the
door, and sat down by the fire.

"I have made up my mind, sir," he began, bending forward as soon as
we were seated, and speaking in a tone but a little above a whisper,
"that you shall not have to ask me twice what troubles me.  I took
you for some one else, yesterday evening.  That troubles me."

"That mistake?"

"No.  That some one else."

"Who is it?"

"I don't know."

"Like me?"

"I don't know.  I never saw the face.  The left arm is across the
face, and the right arm is waved--violently waved.  This way."

I followed his action with my eyes, and it was the action of an arm
gesticulating, with the utmost passion and vehemence:

"For God's sake, clear the way!"

"One moonlight night," said the man, "I was sitting here, when I
heard a voice cry, 'Halloa!  Below there!'  I started up, looked from
that door, and saw this Some one else standing by the red light near
the tunnel, waving as I just now showed you.  The voice seemed hoarse
with shouting, and it cried, 'Look out!  Look out!'  And then again,
'Halloa!  Below there!  Look out!'  I caught up my lamp, turned it on
red, and ran toward the figure, calling, 'What's wrong?  What has
happened?  Where?'  It stood just outside the blackness of the
tunnel.  I advanced so close upon it that I wondered at its keeping
the sleeve across its eyes.  I ran right up at it, and had my hand
stretched out to pull the sleeve away, when it was gone."

"Into the tunnel?" said I.

"No.  I ran on into the tunnel, five hundred yards.  I stopped, and
held my lamp above my head, and saw the figures of the measured
distance, and saw the wet stains stealing down the walls and
trickling through the arch.  I ran out again faster than I had run in
(for I had a mortal abhorrence of the place upon me), and I looked
all round the red light with my own red light, and I went up the iron
ladder to the gallery atop of it, and I came down again, and ran back
here.  I telegraphed both ways, 'An alarm has been given.  Is
anything wrong?'  The answer came back, both ways, 'All well.'"

Resisting the slow touch of a frozen finger tracing out my spine, I
showed him how that this figure must be a deception of his sense of
sight; and how that figures, originating in disease of the delicate
nerves that minister to the functions of the eye, were known to have
often troubled patients, some of whom had become conscious of the
nature of their affliction, and had even proved it by experiments
upon themselves.  "As to an imaginary cry," said I, "do but listen
for a moment to the wind in this unnatural valley while we speak so
low, and to the wild harp it makes of the telegraph wires."

That was all very well, he returned, after we had sat listening for a
while, and he ought to know something of the wind and the wires--he
who so often passed long winter nights there, alone and watching.
But he would beg to remark that he had not finished.

I asked his pardon, and he slowly added these words, touching my arm:

"Within six hours after the Appearance, the memorable accident on
this Line happened, and within ten hours the dead and wounded were
brought along through the tunnel over the spot where the figure had
stood."

A disagreeable shudder crept over me, but I did my best against it.
It was not to be denied, I rejoined, that this was a remarkable
coincidence, calculated deeply to impress his mind.  But it was
unquestionable that remarkable coincidences did continually occur,
and they must be taken into account in dealing with such a subject.
Though to be sure I must admit, I added (for I thought I saw that he
was going to bring the objection to bear upon me), men of common
sense did not allow much for coincidences in making the ordinary
calculations of life.

He again begged to remark that he had not finished.

I again begged his pardon for being betrayed into interruptions.

"This," he said, again laying his hand upon my arm, and glancing over
his shoulder with hollow eyes, "was just a year ago.  Six or seven
months passed, and I had recovered from the surprise and shock, when
one morning, as the day was breaking, I, standing at the door, looked
toward the red light, and saw the spectre again."  He stopped, with a
fixed look at me.

"Did it cry out?"

"No.  It was silent."

"Did it wave its arm?"

"No.  It leaned against the shaft of the light, with both hands
before the face.  Like this."

Once more I followed his action with my eyes.  It was an action of
mourning.  I have seen such an attitude in stone figures on tombs.

"Did you go up to it?"

"I came in and sat down, partly to collect my thoughts, partly
because it had turned me faint.  When I went to the door again,
daylight was above me, and the ghost was gone."

"But nothing followed?  Nothing came of this?"

He touched me on the arm with his forefinger twice or thrice, giving
a ghastly nod each time.

"That very day, as a train came out of the tunnel, I noticed, at a
carriage window on my side, what looked like a confusion of hands and
heads, and something waved.  I saw it just in time to signal the
driver, Stop!  He shut off, and put his brake on, but the train
drifted past here a hundred and fifty yards or more.  I ran after it,
and, as I went along, heard terrible screams and cries.  A beautiful
young lady had died instantaneously in one of the compartments, and
was brought in here, and laid down on this floor between us."

Involuntarily I pushed my chair back, as I looked from the boards at
which he pointed to himself.

"True, sir.  True.  Precisely as it happened, so I tell it you."

I could think of nothing to say, to any purpose, and my mouth was
very dry.  The wind and the wires took up the story with a long
lamenting wail.

He resumed.  "Now, sir, mark this, and judge how my mind is troubled.
The spectre came back a week ago.  Ever since, it has been there, now
and again, by fits and starts."

"At the light?"

"At the Danger-light."

"What does it seem to do?"

He repeated, if possible with increased passion and vehemence, that
former gesticulation of, "For God's sake, clear the way!"

Then he went on.  "I have no peace or rest for it.  It calls to me,
for many minutes together, in an agonized manner, 'Below there!  Look
out!  Look out!'  It stands waving to me.  It rings my little bell--"

I caught at that.

"Did it ring your bell yesterday evening when I was here, and you
went to the door?"

"Twice."

"Why, see," said I, "how your imagination misleads you.  My eyes were
on the bell, and my ears were open to the bell, and if I am a living
man, it did not ring at those times.  No, nor at any other time,
except when it was rung in the natural course of physical things by
the station communicating with you."

He shook his head.  "I have never made a mistake as to that yet, sir.
I have never confused the spectre's ring with the man's.  The ghost's
ring is a strange vibration in the bell that it derives from nothing
else, and I have not asserted that the bell stirs to the eye.  I
don't wonder that you failed to hear it.  But _I_ heard it."

"And did the spectre seem to be there, when you looked out?"

"It was there."

"Both times?"

He repeated firmly: "Both times."

"Will you come to the door with me, and look for it now?"

He bit his under lip as though he were somewhat unwilling, but arose.
I opened the door, and stood on the step, while he stood in the
doorway.  There was the Danger-light.  There was the dismal mouth of
the tunnel.  There were the high, wet stone walls of the cutting.
There were the stars above them.

"Do you see it?" I asked him, taking particular note of his face.
His eyes were prominent and strained, but not very much more so,
perhaps, than my own had been when I had directed them earnestly
toward the same spot.

"No," he answered.  "It is not there."

"Agreed," said I.

We went in again, shut the door, and resumed our seats.  I was
thinking how best to improve this advantage, if it might be called
one, when he took up the conversation in such a matter-of-course way,
so assuming that there could be no serious question of fact between
us, that I felt myself placed in the weakest of positions.

"By this time you will fully understand, sir," he said, "that what
troubles me so dreadfully is the question, What does the spectre
mean?"

I was not sure, I told him, that I did fully understand.

"What is its warning against?" he said, ruminating, with his eyes on
the fire, and only by times turning them on me.  "What is the danger?
Where is the danger?  There is danger overhanging somewhere on the
Line.  Some dreadful calamity will happen.  It is not to be doubted
this third time, after what has gone before.  But surely this is a
cruel haunting of _me_.  What can I do?"

He pulled out his handkerchief, and wiped the drops from his heated
forehead.

"If I telegraph Danger, on either side of me, or on both, I can give
no reason for it," he went on, wiping the palms of his hands.  "I
should get into trouble, and do no good.  They would think I was mad.
This is the way it would work--Message: 'Danger!  Take care!'
Answer: 'What Danger?  Where?'  Message: 'Don't know.  But, for God's
sake, take care!'  They would displace me.  What else could they do?"

His pain of mind was most pitiable to see.  It was the mental torture
of a conscientious man, oppressed beyond endurance by an
unintelligible responsibility involving life.

"When it first stood under the Danger-light," he went on, putting his
dark hair back from his head, and drawing his hands outward across
and across his temples in an extremity of feverish distress, "why not
tell me where that accident was to happen--if it must happen?  Why
not tell me how it could be averted--if it could have been averted?
When on its second coming it hid its face, why not tell me, instead,
'She is going to die.  Let them keep her at home'?  If it came, on
those two occasions, only to show me that its warnings were true, and
so to prepare me for the third, why not warn me plainly now?  And I,
Lord help me! a mere poor signal-man on this solitary station!  Why
not go to somebody with credit to be believed, and power to act?"

When I saw him in this state, I saw that for the poor man's sake, as
well as for the public safety, what I had to do for the time was to
compose his mind.  Therefore, setting aside all question of reality
or unreality between us, I represented to him that whoever thoroughly
discharged his duty must do well, and that at least it was his
comfort that he understood his duty, though he did not understand
these confounding Appearances.  In this effort I succeeded far better
than in the attempt to reason him out of his conviction.  He became
calm; the occupations incidental to his post as the night advanced
began to make larger demands on his attention: and I left him at two
in the morning.  I had offered to stay through the night, but he
would not hear of it.

That I more than once looked back at the red light as I ascended the
pathway, that I did not like the red light, and that I should have
slept but poorly if my bed had been under it, I see no reason to
conceal.  Nor did I like the two sequences of the accident and the
dead girl.  I see no reason to conceal that either.

But what ran most in my thoughts was the consideration how ought I to
act, having become the recipient of this disclosure?  I had proved
the man to be intelligent, vigilant, painstaking, and exact; but how
long might he remain so, in his state of mind?  Though in a
subordinate position, still he held a most important trust, and would
I (for instance) like to stake my own life on the chances of his
continuing to execute it with precision?

Unable to overcome a feeling that there would be something
treacherous in my communicating what he had told me to his superiors
in the Company, without first being plain with himself and proposing
a middle course to him, I ultimately resolved to offer to accompany
him (otherwise keeping his secret for the present) to the wisest
medical practitioner we could hear of in those parts, and to take his
opinion.  A change in his time of duty would come round next night,
he had apprised me, and he would be off an hour or two after sunrise,
and on again soon after sunset.  I had appointed to return
accordingly.

Next evening was a lovely evening, and I walked out early to enjoy
it.  The sun was not yet quite down when I traversed the field-path
near the top of the deep cutting.  I would extend my walk for an
hour, I said to myself, half an hour on and half an hour back, and it
would then be time to go to my signal-man's box.

Before pursuing my stroll, I stepped to the brink, and mechanically
looked down, from the point from which I had first seen him.  I can
not describe the thrill that seized upon me, when, close at the mouth
of the tunnel, I saw the appearance of a man, with his left sleeve
across his eyes, passionately waving his right arm.

The nameless horror that oppressed me passed in a moment, for in a
moment I saw that this appearance of a man was a man indeed, and that
there was a little group of other men, standing at a short distance,
to whom he seemed to be rehearsing the gesture he made.  The
Danger-light was not yet lighted.  Against its shaft, a little low
hut, entirely new to me, had been made of some wooden supports and
tarpaulin.  It looked no bigger than a bed.

With an irresistible sense that something was wrong--with a flashing
self-reproachful fear that fatal mischief had come of my leaving the
man there, and causing no one to be sent to overlook or correct what
he did--I descended the notched path with all the speed I could make.

"What is the matter?" I asked the men.

"Signal-man killed this morning, sir."

"Not the man belonging to that box?"

"Yes, sir."

"Not the man I know?"

"You will recognize him, sir, if you knew him," said the man who
spoke for the others, solemnly uncovering his own head, and raising
an end of the tarpaulin, "for his face is quite composed."

"Oh, how did this happen, how did this happen?" I asked, turning from
one to another as the hut closed in again.

"He was cut down by an engine, sir.  No man in England knew his work
better.  But somehow he was not clear of the outer rail.  It was just
at broad day.  He had struck the light, and had the lamp in his hand.
As the engine came out of the tunnel, his back was toward her, and
she cut him down.  That man drove her, and was showing how it
happened.  Show the gentleman, Tom."

The man, who wore a rough dark dress, stepped back to his former
place at the mouth of the tunnel.

"Coming round the curve in the tunnel, sir," he said, "I saw him at
the end, like as if I saw him down a perspective-glass.  There was no
time to check speed, and I knew him to be very careful.  As he didn't
seem to take heed of the whistle, I shut it off when we were running
down upon him, and called to him as loud as I could call."

"What did you say?"

"I said, 'Below there!  Look out!  Look out!  For God's sake, clear
the way!'"

I started.

"Ah! it was a dreadful time, sir.  I never left off calling to him.
I put this arm before my eyes not to see, and I waved this arm to the
last; but it was no use."

. . . . . . . . . . . .

Without prolonging the narrative to dwell on any one of its curious
circumstances more than on any other, I may, in closing it, point out
the coincidence that the warning of the engine-driver included, not
only the words which the unfortunate signal-man had repeated to me as
haunting him, but also the words which I myself--not he--had
attached, and that only in my own mind, to the gesticulation he
imitated.




THE FOUR-FIFTEEN EXPRESS

BY AMELIA B. EDWARDS

_Amelia Blandford Edwards, the daughter of an English officer, was
born in London in 1831 and died in 1892.  Though principally known to
fame as an Egyptologist of note, she began publishing novels in 1864,
among them being "Debenham's Vow," "Miss Carew, and Other Tales" and
"Lord Brackenbury."  "The Four-Fifteen Express" was published at the
height of her popularity as a writer of fiction.  Miss Edwards
lectured in the United States in 1889-90._



THE FOUR-FIFTEEN EXPRESS

By AMELIA B. EDWARDS

The events which I am about to relate took place between nine and ten
years ago.  Sebastopol had fallen in the early spring, the peace of
Paris had been concluded since March, our commercial relations with
the Russian Empire were but recently renewed; and I, returning home
after my first northward journey since the war, was well pleased with
the prospect of spending the month of December under the hospitable
and thoroughly English roof of my excellent friend, Jonathan Jelf,
Esq., of Dumbleton Manor, Clayborough, East Anglia.  Traveling in the
interests of the well-known firm in which it is my lot to be a junior
partner, I had been called upon to visit not only the capitals of
Russia and Poland, but had found it also necessary to pass some weeks
among the trading ports of the Baltic; whence it came that the year
was already far spent before I again set foot on English soil, and
that, instead of shooting pheasants with him, as I had hoped, in
October, I came to be my friend's guest during the more genial
Christmas-tide.

My voyage over, and a few days given up to business in Liverpool and
London, I hastened down to Clayborough with all the delight of a
schoolboy whose holidays are at hand.  My way lay by the Great East
Anglian line as far as Clayborough station, where I was to be met by
one of the Dumbleton carriages and conveyed across the remaining nine
miles of country.  It was a foggy afternoon, singularly warm for the
4th of December, and I had arranged to leave London by the 4:15
express.  The early darkness of winter had already closed in; the
lamps were lighted in the carriages; a clinging damp dimmed the
windows, adhered to the door-handles, and pervaded all the
atmosphere; while the gas-jets at the neighboring book-stand diffused
a luminous haze that only served to make the gloom of the terminus
more visible.  Having arrived some seven minutes before the starting
of the train, and, by the connivance of the guard, taken sole
possession of an empty compartment, I lighted my traveling-lamp, made
myself particularly snug, and settled down to the undisturbed
enjoyment of a book and a cigar.  Great, therefore, was my
disappointment when, at the last moment, a gentleman came hurrying
along the platform, glanced into my carriage, opened the locked door
with a private key, and stepped in.

It struck me at the first glance that I had seen him before--a tall,
spare man, thin-lipped, light-eyed, with an ungraceful stoop in the
shoulders, and scant gray hair worn somewhat long upon the collar.
He carried a light waterproof coat, an umbrella, and a large brown
japanned deed-box, which last he placed under the seat.  This done,
he felt carefully in his breast-pocket, as if to make certain of the
safety of his purse or pocketbook, laid his umbrella in the netting
overhead, spread the waterproof across his knees, and exchanged his
hat for a traveling-cap of some Scotch material.  By this time the
train was moving out of the station and into the faint gray of the
wintry twilight beyond.

I now recognized my companion.  I recognized him from the moment when
he removed his hat and uncovered the lofty, furrowed, and somewhat
narrow brow beneath.  I had met him, as I distinctly remembered, some
three years before, at the very house for which, in all probability,
he was now bound, like myself.  His name was Dwerrihouse; he was a
lawyer by profession, and, if I was not greatly mistaken, was first
cousin to the wife of my host.  I knew also that he was a man
eminently "well-to-do," both as regarded his professional and private
means.  The Jelfs entertained him with that sort of observant
courtesy which falls to the lot of the rich relation, the children
made much of him, and the old butler, albeit somewhat surly "to the
general," treated him with deference.  I thought, observing him by
the vague mixture of lamplight and twilight, that Mrs. Jelf's cousin
looked all the worse for the three years' wear and tear which had
gone over his head since our last meeting.  He was very pale, and had
a restless light in his eye that I did not remember to have observed
before.  The anxious lines, too, about his mouth were deepened, and
there was a cavernous, hollow look about his cheeks and temples which
seemed to speak of sickness or sorrow.  He had glanced at me as he
came in, but without any gleam of recognition in his face.  Now he
glanced again, as I fancied, somewhat doubtfully.  When he did so for
the third or fourth time I ventured to address him.

"Mr. John Dwerrihouse, I think?"

"That is my name," he replied.

"I had the pleasure of meeting you at Dumbleton about three years
ago."

Mr. Dwerrihouse bowed.

"I thought I knew your face," he said; "but your name, I regret to
say--"

"Langford--William Langford.  I have known Jonathan Jelf since we
were boys together at Merchant Taylor's, and I generally spend a few
weeks at Dumbleton in the shooting season.  I suppose we are bound
for the same destination?"

"Not if you are on your way to the manor," he replied.  "I am
traveling upon business--rather troublesome business too--while you,
doubtless, have only pleasure in view."

"Just so.  I am in the habit of looking forward to this visit as to
the brightest three weeks in all the year."

"It is a pleasant house," said Mr. Dwerrihouse.

"The pleasantest I know."

"And Jelf is thoroughly hospitable."

"The best and kindest fellow in the world!"

"They have invited me to spend Christmas week with them," pursued Mr.
Dwerrihouse, after a moment's pause.

"And you are coming?"

"I can not tell.  It must depend on the issue of this business which
I have in hand.  You have heard perhaps that we are about to
construct a branch line from Blackwater to Stockbridge."

I explained that I had been for some months away from England, and
had therefore heard nothing of the contemplated improvement.

Mr. Dwerrihouse smiled complacently.

"It will be an improvement," he said, "a great improvement.
Stockbridge is a flourishing town, and needs but a more direct
railway communication with the metropolis to become an important
centre of commerce.  This branch was my own idea.  I brought the
project before the board, and have myself superintended the execution
of it up to the present time."

"You are an East Anglian director, I presume?"

"My interest in the company," replied Mr. Dwerrihouse, "is threefold.
I am a director, I am a considerable shareholder, and, as head of the
firm of Dwerrihouse, Dwerrihouse & Craik, I am the company's
principal solicitor."

Loquacious, self-important, full of his pet project, and apparently
unable to talk on any other subject, Mr. Dwerrihouse then went on to
tell of the opposition he had encountered and the obstacles he had
overcome in the cause of the Stockbridge branch.  I was entertained
with a multitude of local details and local grievances.  The rapacity
of one squire, the impracticability of another, the indignation of
the rector whose glebe was threatened, the culpable indifference of
the Stockbridge townspeople, who could not be brought to see that
their most vital interests hinged upon a junction with the Great East
Anglian line; the spite of the local newspaper, and the unheard-of
difficulties attending the Common question, were each and all laid
before me with a circumstantiality that possessed the deepest
interest for my excellent fellow-traveler, but none whatever for
myself.  From these, to my despair, he went on to more intricate
matters: to the approximate expenses of construction per mile; to the
estimates sent in by different contractors; to the probable traffic
returns of the new line; to the provisional clauses of the new act as
enumerated in Schedule D of the company's last half-yearly report;
and so on and on and on, till my head ached and my attention flagged
and my eyes kept closing in spite of every effort that I made to keep
them open.  At length I was roused by these words:

"Seventy-five thousand pounds, cash down."

"Seventy-five thousand pounds, cash down," I repeated, in the
liveliest tone I could assume.  "That is a heavy sum."

"A heavy sum to carry here," replied Mr. Dwerrihouse, pointing
significantly to his breast-pocket, "but a mere fraction of what we
shall ultimately have to pay."

"You do not mean to say that you have seventy-five thousand pounds at
this moment upon your person?" I exclaimed.

"My good sir, have I not been telling you so for the last half-hour?"
said Mr. Dwerrihouse, testily.  "That money has to be paid over at
half-past eight o'clock this evening, at the office of Sir Thomas's
solicitors, on completion of the deed of sale."

"But how will you get across by night from Blackwater to Stockbridge
with seventy-five thousand pounds in your pock it?"

"To Stockbridge!" echoed the lawyer.  "I find I have made myself very
imperfectly understood.  I thought I had explained how this sum only
carries us as far as Mallingford--the first stage, as it were, of our
journey--and how our route from Blackwater to Mallingford lies
entirely through Sir Thomas Liddell's property."

"I beg your pardon," I stammered.  "I fear my thoughts were
wandering.  So you only go as far as Mallingford to-night?"

"Precisely.  I shall get a conveyance from the 'Blackwater Arms.'
And you?"

"Oh, Jelf sends a trap to meet me at Clayborough!  Can I be the
bearer of any message from you?"

"You may say, if you please, Mr. Langford, that I wished I could have
been your companion all the way, and that I will come over, if
possible, before Christmas."

"Nothing more?"

Mr. Dwerrihouse smiled grimly.  "Well," he said, "you may tell my
cousin that she need not burn the hall down in my honor this time,
and that I shall be obliged if she will order the blue-room chimney
to be swept before I arrive."

"That sounds tragic.  Had you a conflagration on the occasion of your
last visit to Dumbleton?"

"Something like it.  There had been no fire lighted in my bedroom
since the spring, the flue was foul, and the rooks had built in it;
so when I went up to dress for dinner I found the room full of smoke
and the chimney on fire.  Are we already at Blackwater?"

The train had gradually come to a pause while Mr. Dwerrihouse was
speaking, and, on putting my head out of the window, I could see the
station some few hundred yards ahead.  There was another train before
us blocking the way, and the guard was making use of the delay to
collect the Blackwater tickets.  I had scarcely ascertained our
position when the ruddy-faced official appeared at our carriage door.

"Tickets, sir!" said he.

"I am for Clayborough," I replied, holding out the tiny pink card.

He took it, glanced at it by the light of his little lantern, gave it
back, looked, as I fancied, somewhat sharply at my fellow-traveler,
and disappeared.

"He did not ask for yours," I said, with some surprise.

"They never do," replied Mr. Dwerrihouse; "they all know me, and of
course I travel free."

"Blackwater!  Blackwater!" cried the porter, running along the
platform beside us as we glided into the station.

Mr. Dwerrihouse pulled out his deed-box, put his traveling-cap in his
pocket, resumed his hat, took down his umbrella, and prepared to be
gone.

"Many thanks, Mr. Langford, for your society," he said, with
old-fashioned courtesy.  "I wish you a good-evening."

"Good-evening," I replied, putting out my hand.

But he either did not see it or did not choose to see it, and,
slightly lifting his hat, stepped out upon the platform.  Having done
this, he moved slowly away and mingled with the departing crowd.

Leaning forward to watch him out of sight, I trod upon something
which proved to be a cigar-case.  It had fallen, no doubt, from the
pocket of his waterproof coat, and was made of dark morocco leather,
with a silver monogram upon the side.  I sprang out of the carriage
just as the guard came up to lock me in.

"Is there one minute to spare?" I asked, eagerly.  "The gentleman who
traveled down with me from town has dropped his cigar-case; he is not
yet out of the station."

"Just a minute and a half, sir," replied the guard.  "You must be
quick."

I dashed along the platform as fast as my feet could carry me.  It
was a large station, and Mr. Dwerrihouse had by this time got more
than half-way to the farther end.

I, however, saw him distinctly, moving slowly with the stream.  Then,
as I drew nearer, I saw that he had met some friend, that they were
talking as they walked, that they presently fell back somewhat from
the crowd and stood aside in earnest conversation.  I made straight
for the spot where they were waiting.  There was a vivid gas-jet just
above their heads, and the light fell full upon their faces.  I saw
both distinctly--the face of Mr. Dwerrihouse and the face of his
companion.  Running, breathless, eager as I was, getting in the way
of porters and passengers, and fearful every instant lest I should
see the train going on without me, I yet observed that the new-comer
was considerably younger and shorter than the director, that he was
sandy-haired, mustachioed, small-featured, and dressed in a close-cut
suit of Scotch tweed.  I was now within a few yards of them.  I ran
against a stout gentleman, I was nearly knocked down by a
luggage-truck, I stumbled over a carpet-bag; I gained the spot just
as the driver's whistle warned me to return.

To my utter stupefaction, they were no longer there.  I had seen them
but two seconds before--and they were gone!  I stood still; I looked
to right and left; I saw no sign of them in any direction.  It was as
if the platform had gaped and swallowed them.

"There were two gentlemen standing here a moment ago," I said to a
porter at my elbow; "which way can they have gone?"

"I saw no gentlemen, sir," replied the man.

The whistle shrilled out again.  The guard, far up the platform, held
up his arm, and shouted to me to "come on!"

"If you're going on by this train, sir," said the porter, "you must
run for it."

I did run for it, just gained the carriage as the train began to
move, was shoved in by the guard, and left, breathless and
bewildered, with Mr. Dwerrihouse's cigar-case still in my hand.

It was the strangest disappearance in the world; it was like a
transformation trick in a pantomime.  They were there one
moment--palpably there, talking, with the gaslight full upon their
faces--and the next moment they were gone.  There was no door near,
no window, no staircase; it was a mere slip of barren platform,
tapestried with big advertisements.  Could anything be more
mysterious?

It was not worth thinking about, and yet, for my life, I could not
help pondering upon it--pondering, wondering, conjecturing, turning
it over and over in my mind, and beating my brains for a solution of
the enigma.  I thought of it all the way from Blackwater to
Clayborough.  I thought of it all the way from Clayborough to
Dumbleton, as I rattled along the smooth highway in a trim dog-cart,
drawn by a splendid black mare and driven by the silentest and
dapperest of East Anglian grooms.

We did the nine miles in something less than an hour, and pulled up
before the lodge gates just as the church clock was striking
half-past seven.  A couple of minutes more, and the warm glow of the
lighted hall was flooding out upon the gravel, a hearty grasp was on
my hand, and a clear jovial voice was bidding me "welcome to
Dumbleton."

"And now, my dear fellow," said my host, when the first greeting was
over, "you have no time to spare.  We dine at eight, and there are
people coming to meet you, so you must just get the dressing business
over as quickly as may be.  By the way, you will meet some
acquaintances; the Biddulphs are coming, and Prendergast (Prendergast
of the Skirmishers) is staying in the house.  Adieu!  Mrs. Jelf will
be expecting you in the drawing-room."

I was ushered to my room--not the blue room, of which Mr. Dwerrihouse
had made disagreeable experience, but a pretty little bachelor's
chamber, hung with a delicate chintz and made cheerful by a blazing
fire.  I unlocked my portmanteau.  I tried to be expeditious, but the
memory of my railway adventure haunted me.  I could not get free of
it; I could not shake it off.  It impeded me, it worried me, it
tripped me up, it caused me to mislay my studs, to mistie my cravat,
to wrench the buttons off my gloves.  Worst of all, it made me so
late that the party had all assembled before I reached the
drawing-room.  I had scarcely paid my respects to Mrs. Jelf when
dinner was announced, and we paired off, some eight or ten couples
strong, into the dining-room.

I am not going to describe either the guests or the dinner.  All
provincial parties bear the strictest family resemblance, and I am
not aware that an East Anglian banquet offers any exception to the
rule.  There was the usual country baronet and his wife; there were
the usual country parsons and their wives; there was the sempiternal
turkey and haunch of venison.  _Vanitas vanitatum_.  There is nothing
new under the sun.

I was placed about midway down the table.  I had taken one rector's
wife down to dinner, and I had another at my left hand.  They talked
across me, and their talk was about babies; it was dreadfully dull.
At length there came a pause.  The entrées had just been removed, and
the turkey had come upon the scene.  The conversation had all along
been of the languidest, but at this moment it happened to have
stagnated altogether.  Jelf was carving the turkey; Mrs. Jelf looked
as if she was trying to think of something to say; everybody else was
silent.  Moved by an unlucky impulse, I thought I would relate my
adventure.

"By the way, Jelf," I began, "I came down part of the way to-day with
a friend of yours."

"Indeed!" said the master of the feast, slicing scientifically into
the breast of the turkey.  "With whom, pray?"

"With one who bade me tell you that he should, if possible, pay you a
visit before Christmas."

"I can not think who that could be," said my friend, smiling.

"It must be Major Thorp," suggested Mrs. Jelf.  I shook my head.

"It was not Major Thorp," I replied; "it was a near relation of your
own, Mrs. Jelf."

"Then I am more puzzled than ever," replied my hostess.  "Pray tell
me who it was."

"It was no less a person than your cousin, Mr. John Dwerrihouse."

Jonathan Jelf laid down his knife and fork.  Mrs. Jelf looked at me
in a strange, startled way, and said never a word.

"And he desired me to tell you, my dear madam, that you need not take
the trouble to burn the hall down in his honor this time, but only to
have the chimney of the blue room swept before his arrival."

Before I had reached the end of my sentence I became aware of
something ominous in the faces of the guests.  I felt I had said
something which I had better have left unsaid, and that for some
unexplained reason my words had evoked a general consternation.  I
sat confounded, not daring to utter another syllable, and for at
least two whole minutes there was dead silence round the table.  Then
Captain Prendergast came to the rescue.

"You have been abroad for some months, have you not, Mr. Langford?"
he said, with the desperation of one who flings himself into the
breach.  "I heard you had been to Russia.  Surely you have something
to tell us of the state and temper of the country after the war?"

I was heartily grateful to the gallant Skirmisher for this diversion
in my favor.  I answered him, I fear, somewhat lamely; but he kept
the conversation up, and presently one or two others joined in, and
so the difficulty, whatever it might have been, was bridged
over--bridged over, but not repaired.  A something, an awkwardness, a
visible constraint remained.  The guests hitherto had been simply
dull, but now they were evidently uncomfortable and embarrassed.

The dessert had scarcely been placed upon the table when the ladies
left the room.  I seized the opportunity to select a vacant chair
next Captain Prendergast.

"In Heaven's name," I whispered, "what was the matter just now?  What
had I said?"

"You mentioned the name of John Dwerrihouse."

"What of that?  I had seen him not two hours before."

"It is a most astounding circumstance that you should have seen him,"
said Captain Prendergast.  "Are you sure it was he?"

"As sure as of my own identity.  We were talking all the way between
London and Blackwater.  But why does that surprise you?"

"Because," replied Captain Prendergast, dropping his voice to the
lowest whisper--"_because John Dwerrihouse absconded three months ago
with seventy-five thousand pounds of the company's money, and has
never been heard of since._"

John Dwerrihouse had absconded three months ago--and I had seen him
only a few hours back!  John Dwerrihouse had embezzled seventy-five
thousand pounds of the company's money, yet told me that he carried
that sum upon his person!  Were ever facts so strangely incongruous,
so difficult to reconcile?  How should he have ventured again into
the light of day?  How dared he show himself along the line?  Above
all, what had he been doing throughout those mysterious three months
of disappearance?

Perplexing questions these--questions which at once suggested
themselves to the minds of all concerned, but which admitted of no
easy solution.  I could find no reply to them.  Captain Prendergast
had not even a suggestion to offer.  Jonathan Jelf, who seized the
first opportunity of drawing me aside and learning all that I had to
tell, was more amazed and bewildered than either of us.  He came to
my room that night, when all the guests were gone, and we talked the
thing over from every point of view; without, it must be confessed,
arriving at any kind of conclusion.

"I do not ask you," he said, "whether you can have mistaken your man.
That is impossible."

"As impossible as that I should mistake some stranger for yourself."

"It is not a question of looks or voice, but of facts.  That he
should have alluded to the fire in the blue room is proof enough of
John Dwerrihouse's identity.  How did he look?"

"Older, I thought; considerably older, paler, and more anxious."

"He has had enough to make him look anxious, anyhow," said my friend,
gloomily, "be he innocent or guilty."

"I am inclined to believe that he is innocent," I replied.  "He
showed no embarrassment when I addressed him, and no uneasiness when
the guard came round.  His conversation was open to a fault.  I might
almost say that he talked too freely of the business which he had in
hand."

"That again is strange, for I know no one more reticent on such
subjects.  He actually told you that he had the seventy-five thousand
pounds in his pocket?"

"He did."

"Humph!  My wife has an idea about it, and she may be right--"

"What idea?"

"Well, she fancies--women are so clever, you know, at putting
themselves inside people's motives--she fancies that he was tempted,
that he did actually take the money, and that he has been concealing
himself these three months in some wild part of the country,
struggling possibly with his conscience all the time, and daring
neither to abscond with his booty nor to come back and restore it."

"But now that he has come back?"

"That is the point.  She conceives that he has probably thrown
himself upon the company's mercy, made restitution of the money, and,
being forgiven, is permitted to carry the business through as if
nothing whatever had happened."

"The last," I replied, "is an impossible case.  Mrs. Jelf thinks like
a generous and delicate-minded woman, but not in the least like a
board of railway directors.  They would never carry forgiveness so
far."

"I fear not; and yet it is the only conjecture that bears a semblance
of likelihood.  However, we can run over to Clayborough to-morrow and
see if anything is to be learned.  By the way, Prendergast tells me
you picked up his cigar-case."

"I did so, and here it is."

Jelf took the cigar-case, examined it by the light of the lamp, and
said at once that it was beyond doubt Mr. Dwerrihouse's property, and
that he remembered to have seen him use it.

"Here, too, is his monogram on the side," he added--"a big J
transfixing a capital D.  He used to carry the same on his
note-paper."

"It offers, at all events, a proof that I was not dreaming."

"Ay, but it is time you were asleep and dreaming now.  I am ashamed
to have kept you up so long.  Good-night."

"Good-night, and remember that I am more than ready to go with you to
Clayborough, or Blackwater, or London, or anywhere, if I can be of
the least service."

"Thanks!  I know you mean it, old friend, and it may be that I shall
put you to the test.  Once more, good-night."

So we parted for that night, and met again in the breakfast-room at
half-past eight next morning.  It was a hurried, silent,
uncomfortable meal; none of us had slept well, and all were thinking
of the same subject.  Mrs. Jelf had evidently been crying, Jelf was
impatient to be off, and both Captain Prendergast and myself felt
ourselves to be in the painful position of outsiders who are
involuntarily brought into a domestic trouble.  Within twenty minutes
after we had left the breakfast-table the dog-cart was brought round,
and my friend and I were on the road to Clayborough.

"Tell you what it is, Langford," he said, as we sped along between
the wintry hedges, "I do not much fancy to bring up Dwerrihouse's
name at Clayborough.  All the officials know that he is my wife's
relation, and the subject just now is hardly a pleasant one.  If you
don't much mind, we will take the 11:10 to Blackwater.  It's an
important station, and we shall stand a far better chance of picking
up information there than at Clayborough."

So we took the 11:10, which happened to be an express, and, arriving
at Blackwater about a quarter before twelve, proceeded at once to
prosecute our inquiry.

We began by asking for the station-master, a big, blunt,
business-like person, who at once averred that he knew Mr. John
Dwerrihouse perfectly well, and that there was no director on the
line whom he had seen and spoken to so frequently.

"He used to be down here two or three times a week about three months
ago," said he, "when the new line was first set afoot; but since
then, you know, gentlemen--"

He paused significantly.

Jelf flushed scarlet.

"Yes, yes," he said, hurriedly; "we know all about that.  The point
now to be ascertained is whether anything has been seen or heard of
him lately."

"Not to my knowledge," replied the station-master.

"He is not known to have been down the line any time yesterday, for
instance?"

The station-master shook his head.

"The East Anglian, sir," said he, "is about the last place where he
would dare to show himself.  Why, there isn't a station-master, there
isn't a guard, there isn't a porter, who doesn't know Mr. Dwerrihouse
by sight as well as he knows his own face in the looking-glass, or
who wouldn't telegraph for the police as soon as he had set eyes on
him at any point along the line.  Bless you, sir! there's been a
standing order out against him ever since the 25th of September last."

"And yet," pursued my friend, "a gentleman who traveled down
yesterday from London to Clayborough by the afternoon express
testifies that he saw Mr. Dwerrihouse in the train, and that Mr.
Dwerrihouse alighted at Blackwater station."

"Quite impossible, sir," replied the station-master, promptly.

"Why impossible?"

"Because there is no station along the line where he is so well known
or where he would run so great a risk.  It would be just running his
head into the lion's mouth; he would have been mad to come nigh
Blackwater station; and if he had come he would have been arrested
before he left the platform."

"Can you tell me who took the Blackwater tickets of that train?"

"I can, sir.  It was the guard, Benjamin Somers."

"And where can I find him?"

"You can find him, sir, by staying here, if you please, till one
o'clock.  He will be coming through with the up express from
Crampton, which stays at Blackwater for ten minutes."

We waited for the up express, beguiling the time as best we could by
strolling along the Blackwater road till we came almost to the
outskirts of the town, from which the station was distant nearly a
couple of miles.  By one o'clock we were back again upon the platform
and waiting for the train.  It came punctually, and I at once
recognized the ruddy-faced guard who had gone down with my train the
evening before.

"The gentlemen want to ask you something about Mr. Dwerrihouse,
Somers," said the station-master, by way of introduction.

The guard flashed a keen glance from my face to Jelf's and back again
to mine.

"Mr. John Dwerrihouse, the late director?" said he, interrogatively.

"The same," replied my friend.  "Should you know him if you saw him?"

"Anywhere, sir."

"Do you know if he was in the 4:15 express yesterday afternoon?"

"He was not, sir."

"How can you answer so positively?"

"Because I looked into every carriage and saw every face in that
train, and I could take my oath that Mr. Dwerrihouse was not in it.
This gentleman was," he added, turning sharply upon me.  "I don't
know that I ever saw him before in my life, but I remember his face
perfectly.  You nearly missed taking your seat in time at this
station, sir, and you got out at Clayborough."

"Quite true, guard," I replied; "but do you not also remember the
face of the gentleman who traveled down in the same carriage with me
as far as here?"

"It was my impression, sir, that you traveled down alone," said
Somers, with a look of some surprise.

"By no means.  I had a fellow-traveler as far as Blackwater, and it
was in trying to restore him the cigar-case which he had dropped in
the carriage that I so nearly let you go on without me."

"I remember your saying something about a cigar-case, certainly,"
replied the guard; "but--"

"You asked for my ticket just before we entered the station."

"I did, sir."

"Then you must have seen him.  He sat in the corner next the very
door to which you came."

"No, indeed; I saw no one."

I looked at Jelf.  I began to think the guard was in the
ex-director's confidence, and paid for his silence.

"If I had seen another traveler I should have asked for his ticket,"
added Somers.  "Did you see me ask for his ticket, sir?"

"I observed that you did not ask for it, but he explained that by
saying--" I hesitated.  I feared I might be telling too much, and so
broke off abruptly.

The guard and the station-master exchanged glances.  The former
looked impatiently at his watch.

"I am obliged to go on in four minutes more, sir," he said.

"One last question, then."  interposed Jelf, with a sort of
desperation.  "If this gentleman's fellow-traveler had been Mr. John
Dwerrihouse, and he had been sitting in the corner next the door by
which you took the tickets, could you have failed to see and
recognize him?"

"No, sir; it would have been quite impossible."

"And you are certain you did not see him?"

"As I said before, sir, I could take my oath I did not see him.  And
if it wasn't that I don't like to contradict a gentleman, I would say
I could also take my oath that this gentleman was quite alone in the
carriage the whole way from London to Clayborough.  Why, sir," he
added, dropping his voice so as to be inaudible to the
station-master, who had been called away to speak to some person
close by, "you expressly asked me to give you a compartment to
yourself, and I did so.  I locked you in, and you were so good as to
give me something for myself."

"Yes; but Mr. Dwerrihouse had a key of his own."

"I never saw him, sir; I saw no one in that compartment but yourself.
Beg pardon, sir; my time's up."

And with this the ruddy guard touched his cap and was gone.  In
another minute the heavy panting of the engine began afresh, and the
train glided slowly out of the station.

We looked at each other for some moments in silence.  I was the first
to speak.

"Mr. Benjamin Somers knows more than he chooses to tell," I said.

"Humph! do you think so?"

"It must be.  He could not have come to the door without seeing him;
it's impossible."

"There is one thing not impossible, my dear fellow."

"What is that?"

"That you may have fallen asleep and dreamed the whole thing."

"Could I dream of a branch line that I had never heard of?  Could I
dream of a hundred and one business details that had no kind of
interest for me?  Could I dream of the seventy-five thousand pounds?"

"Perhaps you might have seen or heard some vague account of the
affair while you were abroad.  It might have made no impression upon
you at the time, and might have come back to you in your dreams,
recalled perhaps by the mere names of the stations on the line."

"What about the fire in the chimney of the blue room--should I have
heard of that during my journey?"

"Well, no; I admit there is a difficulty about that point."

"And what about the cigar-case?"

"Ay, by Jove! there is the cigar-case.  That is a stubborn fact.
Well, it's a mysterious affair, and it will need a better detective
than myself, I fancy, to clear it up.  I suppose we may as well go
home."

A week had not gone by when I received a letter from the secretary of
the East Anglian Railway Company, requesting the favor of my
attendance at a special board meeting not then many days distant.  No
reasons were alleged and no apologies offered for this demand upon my
time, but they had heard, it was clear, of my inquiries anent the
missing director, and had a mind to put me through some sort of
official examination upon the subject.  Being still a guest at
Dumbleton Hall, I had to go up to London for the purpose, and
Jonathan Jelf accompanied me.  I found the direction of the Great
East Anglian line represented by a party of some twelve or fourteen
gentlemen seated in solemn conclave round a huge green baize table,
in a gloomy boardroom adjoining the London terminus.

Being courteously received by the chairman (who at once began by
saying that certain statements of mine respecting Mr. John
Dwerrihouse had come to the knowledge of the direction, and that they
in consequence desired to confer with me on those points), we were
placed at the table, and the inquiry proceeded in due form.

I was first asked if I knew Mr. John Dwerrihouse, how long I had been
acquainted with him, and whether I could identify him at sight.  I
was then asked when I had seen him last.  To which I replied: "On the
4th of this present month, December, 1856."  Then came the inquiry of
where I had seen him on that fourth day of December; to which I
replied that I met him in a first-class compartment of the 4:15 down
express, that he got in just as the train was leaving the London
terminus, and that he alighted at Blackwater station.  The chairman
then inquired whether I had held any communication with my
fellow-traveler; whereupon I related, as nearly as I could remember
it, the whole bulk and substance of Mr. John Dwerrihouse's diffuse
information respecting the new branch line.

To all this the board listened with profound attention, while the
chairman presided and the secretary took notes.  I then produced the
cigar-case.  It was passed from hand to hand, and recognized by all.
There was not a man present who did not remember that plain
cigar-case with its silver monogram, or to whom it seemed anything
less than entirely corroborative of my evidence.  When at length I
had told all that I had to tell, the chairman whispered something to
the secretary; the secretary touched a silver hand-bell, and the
guard, Benjamin Somers, was ushered into the room.  He was then
examined as carefully as myself.  He declared that he knew Mr. John
Dwerrihouse perfectly well, that he could not be mistaken in him,
that he remembered going down with the 4:15 express on the afternoon
in question, that he remembered me, and that, there being one or two
empty first-class compartments on that especial afternoon, he had, in
compliance with my request, placed me in a carriage by myself.  He
was positive that I remained alone in that compartment all the way
from London to Clayborough.  He was ready to take his oath that Mr.
Dwerrihouse was neither in that carriage with me, nor in any
compartment of that train.  He remembered distinctly to have examined
my ticket at Blackwater; was certain that there was no one else at
that time in the carriage; could not have failed to observe a second
person, if there had been one; had that second person been Mr. John
Dwerrihouse should have quietly double-locked the door of the
carriage and have at once given information to the Blackwater
station-master.  So clear, so decisive, so ready, was Somers with
this testimony, that the board looked fairly puzzled.

"You hear this person's statement, Mr. Langford," said the chairman.
"It contradicts yours in every particular.  What have you to say in
reply?"

"I can only repeat what I said before.  I am quite as positive of the
truth of my own assertions as Mr. Somers can be of the truth of his."

"You say that Mr. Dwerrihouse alighted at Blackwater, and that he was
in possession of a private key.  Are you sure that he had not
alighted by means of that key before the guard came round for the
tickets?"

"I am quite positive that he did not leave the carriage till the
train had fairly entered the station, and the other Blackwater
passengers alighted.  I even saw that he was met there by a friend."

"Indeed!  Did you see that person distinctly?"

"Quite distinctly."

"Can you describe his appearance?"

"I think so.  He was short and very slight, sandy-haired, with a
bushy mustache and beard, and he wore a closely fitting suit of gray
tweed, His age I should take to be about thirty-eight or forty."

"Did Mr. Dwerrihouse leave the station in this person's company?"

"I can not tell.  I saw them walking together down the platform, and
then I saw them standing aside under a gas-jet, talking earnestly.
After that I lost sight of them quite suddenly, and just then my
train went on, and I with it."

The chairman and secretary conferred together in an undertone.  The
directors whispered to one another.  One or two looked suspiciously
at the guard.  I could see that my evidence remained unshaken, and
that, like myself, they suspected some complicity between the guard
and the defaulter.

"How far did you conduct that 4:15 express on the day in question,
Somers?" asked the chairman.

"All through, sir," replied the guard, "from London to Crampton."

"How was it that you were not relieved at Clayborough?  I thought
there was always a change of guards at Clayborough."

"There used to be, sir, till the new regulations came in force last
midsummer, since when the guards in charge of express trains go the
whole way through."

The chairman turned to the secretary.

"I think it would be as well," he said, "if we had the day-book to
refer to upon this point."

Again the secretary touched the silver hand-bell, and desired the
porter in attendance to summon Mr. Raikes.  From a word or two
dropped by another of the directors I gathered that Mr. Raikes was
one of the under-secretaries.

He came, a small, slight, sandy-haired, keen-eyed man, with an eager,
nervous manner, and a forest of light beard and mustache.  He just
showed himself at the door of the board-room, and, being requested to
bring a certain day-book from a certain shelf in a certain room,
bowed and vanished.

He was there such a moment, and the surprise of seeing him was so
great and sudden, that it was not till the door had closed upon him
that I found voice to speak.  He was no sooner gone, however, than I
sprang to my feet.

"That person," I said, "is the same who met Mr. Dwerrihouse upon the
platform at Blackwater!"

There was a general movement of surprise.  The chairman looked grave
and somewhat agitated.

"Take care, Mr. Langford," he said; "take care what you say."

"I am as positive of his identity as of my own."

"Do you consider the consequences of your words?  Do you consider
that you are bringing a charge of the gravest character against one
of the company's servants?"

"I am willing to be put upon my oath, if necessary.  The man who came
to that door a minute since is the same whom I saw talking with Mr.
Dwerrihouse on the Blackwater platform.  Were he twenty times the
company's servant, I could say neither more nor less."

The chairman turned again to the guard.

"Did you see Mr. Raikes in the train or on the platform?" he asked.

Somers shook his head.

"I am confident Mr. Raikes was not in the train," he said, "and I
certainly did not see him on the platform."

The chairman turned next to the secretary.

"Mr. Raikes is in your office, Mr. Hunter," he said.  "Can you
remember if he was absent on the 4th instant?"

"I do not think he was," replied the secretary, "but I am not
prepared to speak positively.  I have been away most afternoons
myself lately, and Mr. Raikes might easily have absented himself if
he had been disposed."

At this moment the under-secretary returned with the day-book under
his arm.

"Be pleased to refer, Mr. Raikes," said the chairman, "to the entries
of the 4th instant, and see what Benjamin Somers's duties were on
that day."

Mr. Raikes threw open the cumbrous volume, and ran a practised eye
and finger down some three or four successive columns of entries.
Stopping suddenly at the foot of a page, he then read aloud that
Benjamin Somers had on that day conducted the 4:15 express from
London to Crampton.

The chairman leaned forward in his seat, looked the under-secretary
full in the face, and said, quite sharply and suddenly:

"And where were you, Mr. Raikes, on the same afternoon?"

"_I_, sir?"

"You, Mr. Raikes.  Where were you on the afternoon and evening of the
4th of the present month?"

"Here, sir, in Mr. Hunter's office.  Where else should I be?"

There was a dash of trepidation in the under-secretary's voice as he
said this, but his look of surprise was natural enough.

"We have some reason for believing, Mr. Raikes, that you were absent
that afternoon without leave.  Was this the case?"

"Certainly not, sir.  I have not had a day's holiday since September.
Mr. Hunter will bear me out in this."

Mr. Hunter repeated what he had previously said on the subject, but
added that the clerks in the adjoining office would be certain to
know.  Whereupon the senior clerk, a grave, middle-aged person in
green glasses, was summoned and interrogated.

His testimony cleared the under-secretary at once.  He declared that
Mr. Raikes had in no instance, to his knowledge, been absent during
office hours since his return from his annual holiday in September.

I was confounded.  The chairman turned to me with a smile, in which a
shade of covert annoyance was scarcely apparent.

"You hear, Mr. Langford?" he said.

"I hear, sir; but my conviction remains unshaken."

"I fear, Mr. Langford, that your convictions are very insufficiently
based," replied the chairman, with a doubtful cough.  "I fear that
you 'dream dreams,' and mistake them for actual occurrences.  It is a
dangerous habit of mind, and might lead to dangerous results.  Mr.
Raikes here would have found himself in an unpleasant position had he
not proved so satisfactory an alibi."

I was about to reply, but he gave me no time.

"I think, gentlemen," he went on to say, addressing the board, "that
we should be wasting time to push this inquiry further.  Mr.
Langford's evidence would seem to be of an equal value throughout.
The testimony of Benjamin Somers disproves his first statement, and
the testimony of the last witness disproves his second.  I think we
may conclude that Mr. Langford fell asleep in the train on the
occasion of his journey to Clayborough, and dreamed an unusually
vivid and circumstantial dream, of which, however, we have now heard
quite enough."

There are few things more annoying than to find one's positive
convictions met with incredulity.  I could not help feeling
impatience at the turn that affairs had taken.  I was not proof
against the civil sarcasm of the chairman's manner.  Most intolerable
of all, however, was the quiet smile lurking about the corners of
Benjamin Somers's mouth, and the half-triumphant, half-malicious
gleam in the eyes of the under-secretary.  The man was evidently
puzzled and somewhat alarmed.  His looks seemed furtively to
interrogate me.  Who was I?  What did I want?  Why had I come there
to do him an ill turn with his employers?  What was it to me whether
or no he was absent without leave?

Seeing all this, and perhaps more irritated by it than the thing
deserved, I begged leave to detain the attention of the board for a
moment longer.  Jelf plucked me impatiently by the sleeve.

"Better let the thing drop," he whispered.  "The chairman's right
enough; you dreamed it, and the less said now the better."

I was not to be silenced, however, in this fashion.  I had yet
something to say, and I would say it.  It was to this effect: that
dreams were not usually productive of tangible results, and that I
requested to know in what way the chairman conceived I had evolved
from my dream so substantial and well-made a delusion as the
cigar-case which I had had the honor to place before him at the
commencement of our interview.

"The cigar-case, I admit, Mr. Langford," the chairman replied, "is a
very strong point in your evidence.  It is your only strong point,
however, and there is just a possibility that we may all be misled by
a mere accidental resemblance.  Will you permit me to see the case
again?"

"It is unlikely," I said, as I handed it to him, "that any other
should bear precisely this monogram, and yet be in all other
particulars exactly similar."

The chairman examined it for a moment in silence, and then passed it
to Mr. Hunter.  Mr. Hunter turned it over and over, and shook his
head.

"This is no mere resemblance," he said.  "It is John Dwerrihouse's
cigar-case to a certainty.  I remember it perfectly; I have seen it a
hundred times."

"I believe I may say the same," added the chairman; "yet how account
for the way in which Mr. Langford asserts that it came into his
possession?"

"I can only repeat," I replied, "that I found it on the floor of the
carriage after Mr. Dwerrihouse had alighted.  It was in leaning out
to look after him that I trod upon it, and it was in running after
him for the purpose of restoring it that I saw, or believed I saw,
Mr. Raikes standing aside with him in earnest conversation."

Again I felt Jonathan Jelf plucking at my sleeve.

"Look at Raikes," he whispered; "look at Raikes!"

I turned to where the under-secretary had been standing a moment
before, and saw him, white as death, with lips trembling and livid,
stealing toward the door.

To conceive a sudden, strange, and indefinite suspicion, to fling
myself in his way, to take him by the shoulders as if he were a
child, and turn his craven face, perforce, toward the board, were
with me the work of an instant.

"Look at him!" I exclaimed.  "Look at his face!  I ask no better
witness to the truth of my words."

The chairman's brow darkened.

"Mr. Raikes," he said, sternly, "if you know anything you had better
speak."

Vainly trying to wrench himself from my grasp, the under-secretary
stammered out an incoherent denial.

"Let me go," he said.  "I know nothing--you have no right to detain
me--let me go!"

"Did you, or did you not, meet Mr. John Dwerrihouse at Blackwater
station?  The charge brought against you is either true or false.  If
true, you will do well to throw yourself upon the mercy of the board
and make full confession of all that you know."

The under-secretary wrung his hands in an agony of helpless terror.

"I was away!" he cried.  "I was two hundred miles away at the time!
I know nothing about it--I have nothing to confess--I am innocent--I
call God to witness I am innocent!"

"Two hundred miles away!" echoed the chairman.  "What do you mean?"

"I was in Devonshire.  I had three weeks' leave of absence--I appeal
to Mr. Hunter--Mr. Hunter knows I had three weeks' leave of absence!
I was in Devonshire all the time; I can prove I was in Devonshire!"

Seeing him so abject, so incoherent, so wild with apprehension, the
directors began to whisper gravely among themselves, while one got
quietly up and called the porter to guard the door.

"What has your being in Devonshire to do with the matter?" said the
chairman.  "When were you in Devonshire?"

"Mr. Raikes took his leave in September," said the secretary, "about
the time when Mr. Dwerrihouse disappeared."

"I never even heard that he had disappeared till I came back!"

"That must remain to be proved," said the chairman.  "I shall at once
put this matter in the hands of the police.  In the meanwhile, Mr.
Raikes, being myself a magistrate and used to deal with these cases,
I advise you to offer no resistance, but to confess while confession
may yet do you service.  As for your accomplice--"

The frightened wretch fell upon his knees.

"I had no accomplice!" he cried.  "Only have mercy upon me--only
spare my life, and I will confess all!  I didn't mean to harm him!  I
didn't mean to hurt a hair of his head!  Only have mercy upon me, and
let me go!"

The chairman rose in his place, pale and agitated.  "Good heavens!"
he exclaimed, "what horrible mystery is this?  What does it mean?"

"As sure as there is a God in heaven," said Jonathan Jelf, "it means
that murder has been done."

"No! no! no!" shrieked Raikes, still upon his knees, and cowering
like a beaten hound.  "Not murder!  No jury that ever sat could bring
it in murder.  I thought I had only stunned him--I never meant to do
more than stun him!  Manslaughter--manslaughter--not murder!"

Overcome by the horror of this unexpected revelation, the chairman
covered his face with his hand and for a moment or two remained
silent.

"Miserable man," he said at length, "you have betrayed yourself."

"You bade me confess!  You urged me to throw myself upon the mercy of
the board!"

"You have confessed to a crime which no one suspected you of having
committed," replied the chairman, "and which this board has no power
either to punish or forgive.  All that I can do for you is to advise
you to submit to the law, to plead guilty, and to conceal nothing.
When did you do this deed?"

The guilty man rose to his feet, and leaned heavily against the
table.  His answer came reluctantly, like the speech of one dreaming.

"On the 22d of September."

On the 22d of September!  I looked in Jonathan Jelf's face, and he in
mine.  I felt my own paling with a strange sense of wonder and dread.
I saw his blanch suddenly, even to the lips.

"Merciful heaven!" he whispered.  "_What was it, then, that you saw
in the train?_"


What was it that I saw in the train?  That question remains
unanswered to this day.  I have never been able to reply to it.  I
only know that it bore the living likeness of the murdered man, whose
body had then been lying some ten weeks under a rough pile of
branches and brambles and rotting leaves, at the bottom of a deserted
chalk-pit about half-way between Blackwater and Mallingford.  I know
that it spoke and moved and looked as that man spoke and moved and
looked in life; that I heard, or seemed to hear, things related which
I could never otherwise have learned; that I was guided, as it were,
by that vision on the platform to the identification of the murderer;
and that, a passive instrument myself, I was destined, by means of
these mysterious teachings, to bring about the ends of justice.  For
these things I have never been able to account.

As for that matter of the cigar-case, it proved, on inquiry, that the
carriage in which I traveled down that afternoon to Clayborough had
not been in use for several weeks, and was, in point of fact, the
same in which poor John Dwerrihouse had performed his last journey.
The case had doubtless been dropped by him, and had lain unnoticed
till I found it.

Upon the details of the murder I have no need to dwell.  Those who
desire more ample particulars may find them, and the written
confession of Augustus Raikes, in the files of the "Times" for 1856.
Enough that the under-secretary, knowing the history of the new line,
and following the negotiation step by step through all its stages,
determined to waylay Mr. Dwerrihouse, rob him of the seventy-five
thousand pounds, and escape to America with his booty.

In order to effect these ends he obtained leave of absence a few days
before the time appointed for the payment of the money, secured his
passage across the Atlantic in a steamer advertised to start on the
23d, provided himself with a heavily loaded "life-preserver," and
went down to Blackwater to await the arrival of his victim.  How he
met him on the platform with a pretended message from the board, how
he offered to conduct him by a short cut across the fields to
Mallingford, how, having brought him to a lonely place, he struck him
down with the life-preserver, and so killed him, and how, finding
what he had done, he dragged the body to the verge of an
out-of-the-way chalk-pit, and there flung it in and piled it over
with branches and brambles, are facts still fresh in the memories of
those who, like the connoisseurs in De Quincey's famous essay, regard
murder as a fine art.  Strangely enough, the murderer, having done
his work, was afraid to leave the country.  He declared that he had
not intended to take the director's life, but only to stun and rob
him; and that, finding the blow had killed, he dared not fly for fear
of drawing down suspicion upon his own head.  As a mere robber he
would have been safe in the States, but as a murderer he would
inevitably have been pursued and given up to justice.  So he
forfeited his passage, returned to the office as usual at the end of
his leave, and locked up his ill-gotten thousands till a more
convenient opportunity.  In the meanwhile he had the satisfaction of
finding that Mr. Dwerrihouse was universally believed to have
absconded with the money, no one knew how or whither.

Whether he meant murder or not, however, Mr. Augustus Raikes paid the
full penalty of his crime, and was hanged at the Old Bailey in the
second week in January, 1857.  Those who desire to make his further
acquaintance may see him any day (admirably done in wax) in the
Chamber of Horrors at Madame Tussaud's exhibition, in Baker Street.
He is there to be found in the midst of a select society of ladies
and gentlemen of atrocious memory, dressed in the close-cut tweed
suit which he wore on the evening of the murder, and holding in his
hand the identical life-preserver with which he committed it.




OUR LAST WALK

BY HUGH CONWAY

_Frederick John Fargus (born 1847, died 7885), writing under the
pen-name of Hugh Conway, lived to enjoy but one year of literary fame
as the author of "Called Back," a melodramatic novelette of
strikingly clever conception and powerful narrative style.  The
qualities which distinguish this book are to be found in his other
stories, a number of which, including the present selection, were
published in the year preceding and that following his untimely
death._



OUR LAST WALK

By HUGH CONWAY

If I wished to tell a love tale, I should begin this with the
sweetest memories of my life, and relate when and where Walter Linton
and I first met; should describe my pride and happiness when I knew
that he wished me to become his wife.  The love we bore each other
through life--ay, even after life--may be made manifest as I write
these lines, but it is not because I loved him I have this tale to
tell.  Other women have loved as I love, and have mourned as I mourn:
my life, so far as the joy and grief of it go, is but the life of
thousands.

Had Walter Linton, when first he asked me for the heart which was
already his own, been but a poor, struggling man, I should have given
him all as freely as I did then.  If need had been, I could have
waited patiently for years, or until fortune smiled upon him.
Feeling this, I had no false sentiment as to sharing the worldly good
that was his, although I was a penniless girl and brought nothing in
my hands.  Of course, kind friends around wondered why Walter did not
choose a wife who would bring him wealth as well as love.  Ah, no one
could have given him more love than I could give him; that was all he
wanted or asked for.  He was twenty-three, and his own master; I was
twenty, and utterly alone in this world.  So we were married--just
six weeks after that happy spring day on which he told me I was
dearest to him.

Our home--a dear gray old house, full of pleasant corners--was
Draycot Hall, Somersetshire, not far from the Mendip Hills.  Walter
had recently inherited the house and the estates of Draycot, and when
we took possession of our kingdom, which was almost as new to Walter
as it was to me, life seemed to hold all that could be desired.
Walter's income was sufficient for the life of a quiet country
gentleman--a life to which he settled down, and appeared to find
every wish gratified in that happy existence.  Shooting, fishing, and
hunting gave him plenty of amusement, and the land, part of which he
farmed himself, brought occupation and interest enough to make him
feel that his life was not altogether an idle or useless one.

Then, to make our happiness complete, the children came--a girl, then
one, two, three bonny boys.  How merry and busy the old house grew
with them, the sturdy rogues!  How proud Walter was of them!

We were not very rich people.  Compared to that of some of our county
neighbors, our income was insignificant.  Draycot Hall, although not
such an imposing pile as the name might suggest, was by no means a
small house; and, like all rambling old places, cost a good deal of
money to keep up.  Even when we began life together we found, at the
end of the year, that our expenditure and income nearly tallied, and
as expenses increased with an increasing family, we felt that a few
hundreds added to our revenue would be a very welcome addition.  But
in spite of this our lot was too happy for us to think of grumbling.

We sat one summer's evening on the lawn.  The air was cooled by late
fallen rain, and sweet with fragrance rising from the freshened
flowers--for days were long and petals not yet closed.  Our latest
given child slept on my knee; and, as we watched the sun sink slowly
down behind the Mendip Hills, my husband said:

"Helena, how shall we manage to start all these boys in life?"

I laughed at such a distant obligation.  We were still young, and it
seemed that so many years must pass before the baby on my knee would
want a starting hand.  I kissed the child's little white fingers.

"Why, Walter," I said, "you are looking a long, long way into the
future."

"Yes, my girl; but days happy as ours pass very quickly.  It will not
seem so long before we shall be obliged to think about it.  What
shall we do then?  We save no money even now, you know.  By-and-by we
must send these babies to school; after that they will want money to
help them on in professions.  How are we to do all this?  Our income
won't increase."

"We must try and economize," I answered, impressed by the really
serious view he took.

"But how?  As it is, we can scarcely make both ends meet.  I am
afraid I am selfish in living as I do.  I have serious thought of
going into some business and trying to make a fortune."

I begged, beseeched him to dismiss the wild idea.  Were we not happy
enough with all we now possessed?  Why change our mode of life, which
was so peaceful and sweet?  Besides, in my heart of hearts I doubted
if my good, easy-going Walter was quite fitted for a commercial
career.  He kissed me as I pleaded eloquently for a continuation of
our present happiness, and for a time the subject dropped.

Yet I could see, from remarks he now and again made, that the thought
lingered in his mind, and I began to fear lest, some day, he might
put it into practical shape, when the anxieties attendant on
money-making or money-losing might be ours.

It was some months after our conversation that old Reuben Dyke, a
well-known character in the village of Draycot, came to the Hall.  He
wanted to see the master on important business, he said.  This old
Reuben was the greatest gossip of the place--the ale-house
oracle--meddler in every one's business, and unsolicited
adviser-in-general to the little world around him.  He was a great
authority among the villagers, many of whom would have backed his
opinion against the united wisdom of a Daniel and a Solomon.  His
talk and broad Somerset accent always amused us, and, it may be,
insured him a better reception than his virtues merited.

To-day he entered the room with an indescribable look of mystery and
secrecy on his shrewd old face.  He carefully closed the door after
him and bade us a respectful good-day.  Then, drawing quite close to
us, he spoke in guarded whispers.

"I be jest come, zur, to tell 'ee as ther' have a-bin a chap a
staayin' at the Blue Boar vor the last two or dree daays.  Mebby,
zur, as you've a zeed un about--a darkish, picket-noased zort of a
chap."

"Yes, I saw him," answered Walter.  "What about him?"

"Now, look here, zur.  None o' we couldn't at vust miake out what a
wer' up to.  He yent one o' them outrides, you zee.  He werdn't
lookin' aater shopkippers.  He were a ferretin' about aater land.  Zo
we up and ax'd un what a farm a wer' aater, or if a did want to buy
any land hereabouts?  He laughed and zed, zes he, 'We be gwain to
make a raailroad right up droo theese yer valley.'  Zes I, 'I hoap my
head won't yache till we do get a raailwaay on Mendip, vor that is a
devilish poor country.'  'True,' zes he; 'but there be a lot o' coal
jest under--along Havyat Green and Upper Langford.'  Zes I, 'Zo I've
a-heerd;' and then I zeed in a minute which waay the cat wer'
jumpin'.  He werdn't gwain to make nar a raailwaay; he wanted to zenk
a coal-pit, and get howld o' zome land under false pretenses.  Zo, if
I wer' you, zur, and if I wer' Mr. Llewellyn, I should jest keep my
eyes open; vor I shouldn't wonder if, one o' thease here daays, he
won't be along and offer 'ee a hundred and fifty a yacre vor some o'
your poorest land.  But my advice to you, zur, is--doan't 'ee zell
it--not vor double the money."

After this important communication, Reuben bowed himself out;
retiring probably to the kitchen, in order that he might regale
himself with meat and drink and our servants with the latest village
gossip.  Walter and I sat digesting his news.

"I wonder if there can be any truth in it," said Walter.  "I'll go
down to-morrow and see that fellow at the inn, and ask him pointblank
about it."

But on the morrow the fellow at the inn was there no longer.  He had
departed and left no address.  The landlord only knew him as plain
Mr. Smith.  We never saw or heard of him again--whatever his errand
may have been, it was not revealed to us; but, nevertheless, old
Reuben's conjecture as to the object of his sojourn at the Blue Boar
quite unsettled Walter's mind.  The thought that untold wealth might
be lying under our very feet was always present to it, and at last he
resolved to employ experts who were competent to give an opinion on
the matter, and settle our hopes and doubts.

So, very soon, we were visited by Captain Thomas Davies, of
Aberfellteg, and Captain Davies Thomas, of Cwmtygwyn, two gentlemen
whose strangely accented English, redundant with such words as
"Inteet" and "Inteet to coodness," was a source of great amusement
and enjoyment to each of us.  They inspected, diagnosed,
experimented, and then reported.  My poor dear love! shall I ever
forget your excitement, your joy, as we perused together that glowing
joint production?  What wealth you dreamed of and counted up!  Not, I
know, that you wished for riches for your own sake--it was for the
sake of wife and children that the desire of acquiring a large
fortune obtained such a hold on you.  Ah me! how certain, how clear
and straightforward it all seemed!  Had not the mining captains
calculated, with an accuracy that seemed infallible, every ton of
coal that lay hidden beneath our green fields?  Did not their figures
prove beyond dispute the profit each ton raised must bring?  After
every contingency had been guarded against, what read like Aladdin's
wealth lay waiting for us to stoop down, take, and enjoy.  Why should
we not do so?

Then other gentlemen came to our quiet home--legal
gentlemen--gentlemen who were called financiers--gentlemen learned,
very learned, it seemed to me, in acreages, crops, and soils.  Old
safes were unlocked, old plans and musty deeds extracted from their
recesses.  I heard the word "Mortgage" frequently; and Walter told me
he had resolved to share his promised wealth with no one.  He would
work the projected mines solely on his own account; but, in order to
begin operations, money was needful; so he had arranged with the two
financial gentlemen, Messrs. Leach and Vincent, of Bristol, that such
sums of money as were necessary should be advanced to him upon the
security of his estate.  And these gentlemen applauded Walter's
courageous resolution, and everything went so pleasantly.

Then the digging began!

Oh, how I hated it!  From the very first I hated it!  Not only did it
spoil one of our prettiest fields--the one where the children
gathered earliest cowslips--but it brought strange faces and rough
forms to the quiet, sleepy little village.  Men and women of a very
different type to that of laborers round about.  Slatternly untidy
women and strong, surly men who knew not the traditions of the land.
Men who were supposed to beat their wives once a week, and who, we
knew, played havoc with our neighbors' costly preserves.  Men who
worked hard--very hard--and insisted upon that work being highly paid
for--who spent so large a proportion of those hard-earned wages in
drink, that the landlords of the opposition village inns actually
shook hands in their unexpected prosperity; whilst our kind, old,
easy-going rector fairly cried at the way in which his new and
unwelcome parishioners were demoralizing the old ones, and old Reuben
Dyke seemed to look almost patronizingly upon us, as two deserving
young people helped to fortune by his great sagacity and wisdom.

So it went on, month after month; yet I saw no signs of the advent of
that promised wealth.  So far as I could understand it, the seam of
coal hit upon by those clever captains was a failure.  It broke, or
dipped, or something else; so the continuation had to be sought
elsewhere.  Thereupon Captains Thomas Davies and Davies Thomas came
over again, inspected again, and reported so cheerfully that Walter's
face lost that look of anxiety which I had lately seen upon it, and
he pushed on the work more briskly than before.

Then they told me the right seam had been found--Walter was radiant.
Out of the first money gained he would send Thomas Davies and Davies
Thomas a hundred pounds apiece, as an extra recognition due to their
skill and good counsel.  Larger sums than before were furnished by
our financial friends, who came to the Hall once or twice, and were,
I thought, very rude and familiar in their manner.  Machinery and
engines were erected, more men engaged, and in time great black heaps
began to accumulate, and grimy black faces met me at every turn.  Our
peaceful and beautiful home was so changed that I began almost to
loathe what had once been the dearest spot on earth to me, and to
long for change of air and scene.

Money seemed always being paid away--large sums that frightened me.
But was I not only a woman, who knew nothing of business?

Yet all these grievances were nothing to the grief I felt at seeing
the change in my darling's face.  Every week I noticed an alteration.
Gradually a cloud of care seemed settling down on his once gay
nature, and I knew his mind was anxious and ill at ease.  He grew
thinner; his dark hair showed signs of premature grayness; his sleep
was often restless and unfreshing.  Though now, as he ever had been,
kind and gentle to me, at times with others he was moody, silent, and
evidently worried.  All the brightness of youth appeared to be
leaving him, so much so that my heart ached to see him, and I felt I
could bear it no longer.  I would learn the worst he had to tell me,
claiming my right as a true wife to share trouble as well as joy with
my husband.

The confidence I was resolved to claim came unasked for.  One evening
Walter returned home and threw himself into a chair, apparently
utterly broken down.  He covered his eyes with his hands and sobbed
bitterly.

I knelt at his side and my arms were round him.  Then he told me
all--I need not give the details.  The bare truth was this: After all
the money spent, the coal raised was of such a poor quality that
every ton sold was sold at a loss.  And more money than I had ever
imagined had been expended.  Of course he had been cheated--I knew he
was being cheated the moment I saw the faces of the men who had lent
him the money he wanted; but there was no help for it now.  Messrs.
Leach and Vincent claimed, for advances, costs and interest, the
enormous sum of close upon ten thousand pounds.  Walter had just come
from Bristol, where these men carried on business, and after a stormy
interview with them, had been informed that unless the amount was
paid by Saturday, house, lands, and everything would be at once
advertised for sale--and to-day was Wednesday!

I knew nothing of law; but, even to my ignorance, this sudden demand
and swift procedure seemed unusual.

"But can they do it?" I asked.

"Yes, I am afraid they can.  Months ago, when they made me a large
advance, they gave me notice to pay the mortgage off.  It was a mere
matter of form, they said; but now they will act upon it.  They are
thorough-going rogues, and I believe have some scheme in their heads
by which they fancy it possible to get absolute possession of the
whole estate."

"But, Walter dear, the estate must be worth thousands more than that
amount."

"Oh yes, I can get the money easily enough.  But not in three days.
It will cut me to the heart even to see it all advertised, although
doubtless the sale may be stopped."

"Why not go to that nice old gentleman, Mr. Mainwaring?" I suggested.
"You always call him your family solicitor.  He will help you, I am
sure."

"That is just what I intend doing.  I shall go to London to-morrow,
and show him exactly how I stand, and beg as a great favor that I may
have the money at once.  When I return I will give orders for all the
men to be discharged and the machinery sold.  There shall be an end
of it before it makes an end of me."

I was almost hysterical with joy as I heard his last words.

"Oh, my love!" I cried.  "It will all come right with us yet.  We are
after all only half ruined.  We can let the Hall and go abroad for
several years.  Don't trouble about it any more.  If you could only
know how happy I am to think I shall have you back once again, all to
myself as of old, you would be happy too.  We will live in some quiet
French or Swiss town, and be everything to one another again."

So I talked to him and comforted him, until he grew more composed,
and, kissing me, owned that life was still worth having, even if
shorn of half its wealth.

That night I slept more happily than I had slept for months.

The morning's post brought a letter from Leach and Vincent.  It was
couched in legal terms, and stated that unless the amount due was
paid in notes or gold by Saturday at noon, they would take the
threatened steps.  Walter at once despatched a telegram, saying the
money would be paid, and requesting that the necessary release might
be prepared in order to avoid any delay.  Then he started for London,
in quest of ten thousand pounds.

I had little fear as to the result of his expedition.  I can read
faces; and long ago I had read in Mr. Mainwaring's face the kindness
of his disposition.  I knew he was rich, and that his clients were
also rich men; moreover, he had a high opinion of Walter, and held
him in what might almost be termed affection.  When he congratulated
me upon my marriage, he told me, in unmistakable words, what he
thought of my husband.  So I was not surprised when, on the Friday
evening, Walter returned with a semblance of the old joyous smile on
his face; and, after locking a pocketful of bank-notes in the safe,
sat down by me, and for the rest of the evening built airy castles,
or rather cottages, full of peacefulness and love.

When I awoke next morn, my heart was light; trouble, it seemed, had
been, but passed away so swiftly that its traces scarce remained.  I
threw the window open, and the fresh, sweet air of spring brought
gladness on its wings.  The honeysuckle, old and great, that clothed
the wall beneath my window, just gave signs of breaking into blossom;
leaning out, I plucked some sprays and pinned them in my dress.  A
thrush sung from a bush below; my heart kept echoing his notes of
love and joy.  What cared I for the money, or its loss?  Should I not
have my own love back again, and watch his face regain its old bright
look of health and happiness?  Passed by his side, and with our
children round, would not my life be pleasant in some quaint old town
of France?  And we would live so carefully, and save money as years
went on, until some day might bring us to the dear old Hall again.
Unhappy?--no! few moments in my life had happier been than these.

And Walter was cheerful.  He would soon be out of the clutches of his
obliging friends.  The shock was over.  He had told me what had been
gnawing at his heart for so long; he was now looking his troubles
fairly in the face, and, as usually happens, found them not so
terrible in aspect as he had imagined.  He buttoned his bank-notes in
his breast-pocket and started for the railway station.  He felt
better and stronger to-day, and, as the morning was so beautifully
fine, was tempted to walk the five miles, instead of driving, as he
usually did.

We were early risers, so he had plenty of time, and I thought the
walk would do him good.  Perhaps it was the feeling of newly restored
confidence--perfect and true--which now existed between us that made
his farewell to me that morning even more affectionate than it was
wont to be--made him insist upon having all the children brought
down, and taking many a kiss from those little rosy pursed-up
lips--made him pause when he reached the furthest point to which my
eyes could follow him, and turning, waft me one more farewell.

I should have walked with him, at any rate, part of the way; but
household duties had to be attended to; so, after watching his tall
figure disappear at the turning of the drive, I reentered the house,
hoping that the day would pass quickly, and hasten the evening which
would bring him back again.

Months and months ago I had promised a friend, who sighed in far-away
lands for English fields again, to make, this spring, a little
collection of dried ferns and send it to her.  The anxiety of the
last few months had driven the promise from my mind, but as, this
morning, I pictured our own projected emigration, my thoughts turned
to my distant friend, and my broken promise came back to me.  I
determined that on the first opportunity I would make amends for my
neglect.

Ferns, many of them scarce ones, grew plentifully in our pleasant
country; but on the road that Walter must take on his way to the
station they flourished in unusual abundance.  I could obtain many
varieties close at hand, but some few grew further off; so I asked
Walter, if he should chance to meet with any specimens of these
particular sorts, to pick a frond or two, which he could place
between the leaves of the book he carried.  I wanted, especially, a
specimen of the Northern Shield Fern, which even here is not very
common, growing as it does in little patches, sometimes miles apart.
He laughed at my idle request, but promised to attend to it.

The day wore on, and the sun got low.  It was time to send the
dog-cart to meet the train.  Long, long before the time had elapsed
in which, by any chance, it could return, I was waiting at the window
to welcome Walter home again.  I waited and waited, until so many
weary minutes crawled away that I was fain to conclude he had been
detained in Bristol until the next and last train.

I nursed my disappointment, and killed the time as best I could.  The
hour when I might surely expect him came and passed.  The train must
be late.  I opened the window, and waited and listened for the sound
of his coming.

At last I heard the ring of the horse's hoofs, and saw the
approaching dog-cart dimly by the light of the stars.  I ran to the
door, eager to greet my husband; but as the horse drew up on the
gravel, I could see only one figure in the dog-cart--that of James,
our groom.  He told me that his master had come by neither train, so,
after waiting, he had driven back alone.

I turned away, very miserable and sad at heart, but, strange to say,
felt no fear of evil.  Business had, of course, detained him.  It
seemed unkind not to have let me know in some way, but perhaps he
could find no means of doing so.  There was not the slightest chance
of his returning to-night, the distance being far too great for
driving.  I must wait until to-morrow.

It was only when I went to bed--alone, for almost the first time
since we were married--that fear fell upon me, and fancy brought
horrid ideas to my mind--that the possibility of evil having befallen
my husband came to me.  The large sum of money he carried, the lonely
road, the black-faced colliers about the neighborhood--all combined
to fill me with a nameless dread--a terror which I could scarcely put
into thoughts, much less into words.  Yet I strove with my fears,
trying to strangle each one as it was born.

"I shall see him to-morrow.  To-morrow I shall see him," I repeated
over and over again; and as that morning at last dawned, I fell into
a restless sleep.

But morning brought him not; noon brought him not--neither letter nor
message.  So my heart died within me; and taking a maid with me, I
started for Bristol by the afternoon train.  It was Sunday; the
streets of the large town looked dreary and deserted as we passed
through them.  Knowing Mr. Leach's private address, we drove straight
to his house.  After some delay I was shown into a room.

By and by Mr. Leach entered, with his fat forefinger closed in a book
of sermons, which, I felt instinctively, he had been engaged in
reading for the benefit of his young vultures.  His smooth face was
full of gentle astonishment that any one should wish to confer with
him on business matters on that particular evening in the week.  As I
looked at him and read through his mask of hypocrisy, I knew that the
man was a rogue and capable of committing any crime.  When he saw who
his visitor was, his astonished look changed to one of annoyance.  He
closed his book entirely, laying it on the table with the edifying
title turned toward me.

It seems childish to mention such trivial incidents; but during that
terrible time every word, every detail, seems graven upon my memory
in deep lines that will never be effaced.

"I have called, Mr. Leach--" I began.

"My dear Mrs. Linton, I know why you have called.  But I am sorry to
be obliged to say that your errand is useless--utterly useless.  Mr.
Linton made a promise he has not kept.  He can not blame us for the
steps we have taken."

"A promise not kept?" I echoed.

"Certainly not.  He undertook to pay us a large sum of money
yesterday.  He has not been near us--I conclude he fa ill," he added,
with an approach to a sneer.

I sunk back in the wildest grief.  Then all my fears of the night,
all my forebodings of the day, were true!  I knew that never--never
again should I look on Walter's face.  He had been murdered--but by
whom?

Mr. Leach endeavored, after the manner of his kind, to comfort me.
He placed his fat hand in a soothing way upon my arm.  This action
restored my senses to me.

"My husband left me only yesterday morning with the money you claim
in his pocket.  I know it for certain.  He was going straight to you.
Where is he?  Tell me?"

Mr. Leach gave a start of surprise, but said nothing.  I waited for
his answer.

"Where is he?" I reiterated.  "Tell me!"

Mr. Leach placed his finger-tips together, and looked at me with an
expression almost like placid amusement.

"Mrs. Linton," he said slowly, "I am a man of business, and have seen
strange things in my time, so you mustn't be offended if I ask you a
question.  Mr. Linton had the money ready for us, you say.  In what
form was it?"

"In notes, sir," I replied.  "He told me you declined taking anything
else."

"Yes, yes--except gold.  So we did.  We are bound to be careful.
Now, Mrs. Linton--mind, I mean no offense--do you know that your
husband was much embarrassed?"

"I know he could pay all just debts--and unjust ones, too," I
answered, with rising indignation.

"Yes, of course.  All just and unjust debts.  All unjust debts--very
good.  Now, do you think it possible--ten thousand is a lot of
money--do you think it possible that Mr. Linton may have--well, in
plain English, decamped with it?"

I heard no more.  My face was flaming.  I rose and, without another
word, left the room.  I was in the cab before Mr. Leach had recovered
from his surprise, and in another minute was sobbing my poor heart
out on the shoulder of my maid--a faithful, good girl who loved me.

I can not tell you of the next few days.  The uncertainty of
everything, yet, to me, the utter hopelessness.  The dread of what
any moment might make known to me.  The searchers searching and
hoping to find--what?  For I knew that the success of their quest
could only bring me the dead body of my darling--murdered, perhaps,
for the sake of the money he carried.  Yet hardest of all to bear was
the knowledge that the sorrow manifested by those around me was only
assumed out of respect to me; that no one believed Walter to be dead;
that the wicked, cruel slander which had framed itself in Mr. Leach's
mind had entered into the minds of others.  I could read the thought
in the faces of all who came near me during those days.  I knew that
the paid seekers performed their task with a smile on their
lips--that the word went around among them that, in order to be
successful, the search should be, not for a dead, but for a living
man, to find whom it was needful to look further away.  How was it I
did not go mad?

I cared nothing when some one told me that the property, house, and
all were advertised for sale in a few weeks' time.  I thought of
nothing, saw nothing but the cold, still face of the one I loved.  I
wished for nothing now but to see his name cleared from the stain
thrown upon it--a stain he would have heeded more than death; this
done, I wished to die--that was all.  The wild thought which had at
first entered my head, that the men to whom he owed the money had
taken it and made away with him, was at last dispelled; for proof was
positive that Walter had not gone to Bristol on that fatal morning.
The passengers from the station were too few, and Walter too well
known not to have been noticed.  Indeed, no ticket for the class by
which he would certainly have traveled had been issued that day.  No
one had met him that morning, and he had disappeared without leaving
a trace; for people told me that every inch of the country near had
been scoured.  But I knew they deceived me, and that the wicked
thought was in every heart, although no one dared to speak it in
words to me who knew him and loved him.

Mr. Mainwaring, whom I had almost forgotten in my grief, came down in
the course of a few days.  Unfit as I was for business, I was
compelled to see him.  The kind old man was in great distress and
anxiety, but he was very good to me.  He started when he saw that I
had already put on mourning.

"It is dreadful," he said, with tears in his eyes, and taking both my
hands in his.  "Not that I care for the money so much--although, of
course, I must make up any deficiency myself, having been guilty of
such irregularity.  It is dreadful to think that I, who tried to help
Walter, must now strip his wife and children of their last shilling.
I trusted him so that I let him have my client's money simply on his
note-of-hand, bearing, of course, all responsibility myself.  It was
most irregular; but he was so urgent, and I wanted to help him.  Poor
girl!  I will do what I can for you, but I am afraid it can be but
little."

I begged him not to think of us, and thanked him again and again for
his great kindness.

"I would, if only in my own interests, pay the money again and stop
the sale; but no one has the power to mortgage the property to me.
We do not even know that Walter is dead.  It can not, can not be
true, what every one seems to hint at?" he added, almost shamefacedly.

I burst into a flood of tears and almost fell at his feet.

"Not you, Mr. Mainwaring!  Not you!" I sobbed out.  "You, who knew
him, and knew that dishonor was not in him!  Let me think that one,
at least, believes in my dead love.  Would to God, for my sake, it
were as people think, so that I might some day see him again."

The kind old friend raised me.

"No," he said; "I don't believe it.  I have known him from a boy, and
I knew his father before him.  They lie who say Walter Linton could
have done such a thing.  But it is all very, very dreadful."

Mr. Mainwaring slept at Draycot Hall that night, but I could not
bring myself to spend the evening in his company.  We could but think
or speak of one subject, and I felt I had no right to inflict my
grief upon him.  I should be better alone.  I watched the children
sink to sleep, and for some hours sat by their little white beds
listening to their regular breathing.  Then I kissed them all gently
and very quickly, lest my hot tears, falling on their upturned faces,
should awake them; and, near midnight, retired to what with me would
wrongly be called rest.  I locked the door of my room, undressed
myself, and sat in my dressing-gown over the fire, for the night
being damp and cold, my good maid had kindled a fire for me.

And there I sat, not seeking rest.  I knew that sleep and I must be
strangers for hours; that not until my strength was quite worn out
would sad thoughts cease and change to sadder dreams; not till at
last, from sheer fatigue they fell, would weary eyelids curtain
tearful eyes.  And so I sat, till slowly died the fire, and morning
air stole chilly through the room--thinking of all the joy and
sweetness of life so lately promised, all it gave me now.  It seemed
so hard to lose the one I loved--lost, as it were, in darkest night,
with none to say where he had wandered.

"Oh!" I cried, "if I could see you once and say farewell, although
your words came but from dying lips!  I should not grieve so much,
and for the sake of children dear to both might live, and even not go
mad."

The wind had risen with the night, and gusts now and again bore heavy
rain that beat against my window; whilst the tall trees round moaned
as the gale went tearing through their boughs.  The world seemed full
of dismal sounds and grief, and I the saddest in the world.  At last
sleep conquered sorrow, so I threw myself down on the bed and slept.
How long it was I slept I can not tell, for all the while I seemed
awake and seeing fearful sights.  Cruel voices whispered words that
stabbed my heart, so that in dreams I longed for wakefulness.  Then I
awoke and heard the wind and rain, louder and fiercer, whilst the
room looked strange as morning dawned in cheerless gray, and crept in
through the half turned blind.

I felt dazed.  For a moment I could scarcely realize where I was, or
quite recall what had happened.  I even turned, from force of habit,
to see if Walter, who should be by my side, was also awake.  Then, as
I saw the vacant pillow by mine, all came back to me--came back with
such a reflux of sorrow that, in my despair, I threw out my arms, and
sobbing bitterly, called on the one who could not hear me.  My right
hand lay as it had fallen, outside the coverlid, and, in a minute, I
almost shrieked with horror and alarm; for I felt another hand seek
it, touch it; and I experienced the sensation of fingers closing
round my own.  Hastily I tore my hand away from that clasp--if what
held without restraining, made itself distinctly felt without
offering resistance, can be called a clasp--and sprang from the bed.
Courageous as I am by nature, I trembled like a leaf, and had it been
dark when that unknown hand sought mine, my horror must have vented
itself in screams.  But the room was nearly light; so in a few
moments I conquered that overpowering fright and looked around for
the intruder.  I peered into every nook in which one might possibly
hide, but detected no one.  The door was as firmly locked as I left
it.  I was alone, for no one could have entered either by door or
window.  Then I sat down and reasoned with myself on my folly.  It
was fancy from a mind upset and overwrought with grief.  It was the
lingering impression left by one of those dreams--those dreadful
dreams which sleep had brought me!  It was a pure delusion, a
creation of my own, and I wondered if, as I feared at times, I was
going out of my senses.  Although I was able to persuade myself that
this reasoning was correct, I dared not return to my bed, but,
sitting once more in my chair, longed for broad daylight.

My thoughts soon wandered away from my recent fright, and took that
path which they always followed.  My arm dropped to my side, and my
fingers relaxed themselves.  And then, once more I felt that hand
creep to mine, take it, and hold it.  Again I felt the unmistakable
sensation of fingers that closed round mine.  I felt that there was
no hand in mine that my hand could clasp in return, but the sensation
of a palm against my palm--fingers twining my fingers--was
indisputable.  The sensation of pressure was there--faintly, it is
true, but it was there.  It was no fancy, no dream, this time.
Whether mortal or not, a hand, or the semblance of a hand, was
holding mine.  Again the horror overcame me--again I strove to tear
my hand away from this invisible clasp.  My blood curdled as I found
the result of my efforts failed on this second occasion--found that
the fingers which fastened on my own could not be shaken off, do what
I would.  As I moved my hand, even so the hand that held it moved
with it.  If I clinched my own, I could yet feel the strange pressure
of those unseen fingers.  If I grasped my right hand in my left,
there was still the sensation of another hand between my own.  Do
what I would, move how I would, that clasp, or phantom of a clasp,
was ever on my hand.  Yet I struggled with fear until the awful
thought flashed through my brain that this was the aura, the
forerunner of paralysis or epilepsy.  Then I could bear it no longer.
Whether that grasp was the result of bodily or mental ailment, I
could bear it no longer--I felt my mind was going.  I rushed to the
door, tore it open, and my screams rang through the house.  Remember,
I was but a woman, and alone.

As the sound of hurrying feet drew near, that hand or hand-clasp
lying on my own quitted it.  Then, as the strange sensation ceased,
did I hear a mournful sound, like a sigh, or was it only the wind
outside?  Did the phantom fingers draw themselves away from mine
soothingly, even, it seemed, reluctantly, or was that fancy too?  As
the servants with frightened looks drew near me, could that wild and
joyful thought that flashed through my brain be more than the thought
of a madwoman?  What could it mean?

Except for this I was myself again.  I had been frightened, I told
all who came to me--frightened by dreams, by shadows, by solitude,
and my own thoughts.  No one wondered at it; what flesh and blood
could stand, unmoved, the anxiety I had borne during the last week?
I was over-wrought and suffering from sleeplessness, so Mr.
Mainwaring insisted upon giving me an opiate.  I swallowed it
reluctantly, and my maid sat with me, until, in due time, dull sleep
told of the potency and efficacy of the drug which I had been made to
take.

This artificial sleep lasted without a break until late in the
afternoon.  Then I awoke refreshed, and in full possession of my
senses.  I arose and prayed, as I had never prayed before, that my
hand might again feel that unseen touch which had nearly driven me
mad in the night.  "Will it come again?  O, let it come again!" was
the constant cry of my heart; and I longed ardently for the night,
which, perhaps, might bring that hand seeking my own again.  For
incredible as it seems, I knew, when those fingers last left mine,
that love had in part conquered death--that Walter had been with me.
Now I feared nothing.  Why should I fear?  He had loved me living--he
loved me now.  Whether he came to me in body or in spirit, should he
not be welcome?  Oh, that he might come again!

And he came again.  Mr. Mainwaring, who would not leave Draycot that
day on account of the apparently strange state of my health, that
evening insisted upon my taking a turn in the garden.  I obeyed him,
although every plant, every blossom around, seemed breathing sadness.
I was too tired to walk for longer than a few minutes, but sat on my
favorite seat, and watched the sun sink behind the hills.  Even then
and there--in broad daylight--I felt his hand seek my own, and my
heart leaped with joy.  I shunned or strove to avoid it no longer.  I
let my hand lie still, and again I felt the touch, or the spirit of
the touch, of the one I loved.  So naturally those fingers closed
round mine; so familiar seemed that clasp to me, that could I have
forgotten the last week, I might have closed my eyes, and, lying
there with my hand in his, have thought I had only to open them to
happiness once more.  If I could but forget!

Even if I had not known in whose hand mine was resting, the caress
those fingers gave me would have told me.  I wondered why I feared
and repulsed them at first.  If only I could sometimes sit as I sat
then, and know and feel that Walter was beside me, I thought that
life might even be happy.  So I turned my head toward him, and said,
softly--so softly:

"Dearest love, you will come often and often, will you not?  You will
be always with me; then I shall not be unhappy."

He answered not, but I felt a change in the clasp of his hand, and I
pondered as to what its meaning could be.  Then I fancied that
faintly, very faintly, that touch was endeavoring to make me
understand something which my grosser earthly faculties failed to
grasp--to direct, to lead me somewhere for some purpose.  For it left
me and came again, left and came again, till at last I learned its
meaning.

Then and there I rose.  "I come, my love," I said.  And once more
Walter Linton and his wife walked, as they had walked many a time
before, hand-in-hand down the broad garden path; past the rustic
lodge, covered with rosebuds and woodbine; through the gateway; out
into the high road.  I feared nothing: the hand of the one I loved
was in mine, and guiding me whither he chose; moreover it was yet
daylight, and I was not dreaming.

I even knew that Mr. Mainwaring followed us as we walked down the
path.  I saw him come to my side and look at me with wonder.  I
wanted no one to be near my husband and myself, so I waved him back
imperiously.  "Follow if you like," I said, "but do not speak to us."
Perhaps he thought I was mad, perhaps that I was walking in my sleep,
and, if so, feared to awake me.  Any way, he followed us silently,
and that was all I knew or cared about him, or about anything else.
For were not my love and I walking, once more, hand-in-hand, and it
was not in a dream?

Along and along the road, each side of which is beautiful with its
green banks and hedges, and every inch of which we know, even keeping
to that side we always choose because the flowers grow thickest
there.  How fresh and green everything looks this evening!  The
swallows are flying here and there.  Every blade of grass is washed
clean from dust by the heavy rain of the morning.  No.  I am not
dreaming.  I am walking with my husband.  A nightingale breaks Into
song near us, as we walk.  We stop--who could help stopping to
listen?  Now its melody ceases, and Walter leads me on.  It is like
in the old days when we were first wed; before we thought or wished
for more wealth.  Those days when all the country round was fresh and
new to me.  Never did the wild-flowers, I think, look gayer than they
look this evening, although they are closing fast.  I would stop, my
darling, and gather a bunch for the children; but they have so many
flowers at home, and I fear to loose your hand for a moment.
Besides, you wish to lead me further yet; we have somewhere to go to
this evening.  I forget whither it was you told me, Walter.  Is it to
the lily-pond, to see if we can find any snow-white cups floating,
buoyed up by the broad green leaves?  Is it to climb the hill that
lies in front of us, and see the very last of the glorious sun; to
catch the crimson sparkle of its rays on the distant windows of our
dear home?  That sun which will rise to-morrow, and waken us both so
early--for you will never leave me again, Walter--promise me, my
darling--I have been so unhappy.  Is it further yet?  To the ruins of
the gray old abbey where the poet's ivy grows so freely?  Shall we
wait there, as once before, and see the full moon shine through the
rose of the east windows?  Shall we wander arm-in-arm through the dim
glades, laughing at the foolish monks who chose to live and die
there, knowing not love, nor the sweetness of life when two share its
joys and troubles?  But our troubles are over now, are they not,
dearest?  No matter, lead me whither you will: I care not--you are
with me, your hand is in mine, and I am happy.  But wherever we go,
we will walk back by moonlight, and then creep up quietly and kiss
the children just once before we go to bed.  To-morrow we will wake
and love again.  No, I am not dreaming.  But why do you not speak to
me and tell me where you have been--why you left me so long?  Oh, how
I have wept and waited for you!  Dearest, you will never leave me
again?

This is the spot you wished to lead me to--the place where the ferns
grow?  Ah, you remembered what I wanted.  Are there any of that sort
up there?  Let us go and see, although the day is flying fast.
Through the hazel bushes--deep, deep into the underwood--on and
on--up and up--brambles and stones!  I did not know it was so steep
here.  Hold my hand firmer and help me.  More bushes, more
undergrowth; and how the twilight fades!  My darling, we shall find
no ferns to-night.  May we not go back and come again to-morrow?  Yet
on, and on!  Love, where you lead I follow and fear not!  Is not your
hand in mine, and you will never leave me again!  Still on!  My
darling, you have brought me to the very edge of a rock!  Don't leave
me here!  Don't draw your hand from mine!  Stay one minute--one
moment longer!  I can not see you; it is dark and cold!  I can not
feel you, and the world seems filling again with grief.  Come back!
Come back!  Walter!  Walter!

They told me I dreamed it--that I walked in my sleep.  Clever and
learned men said so, and I am only a woman, neither clever nor
learned.  Mr. Mainwaring, who had with great difficulty followed
us--for I say "us," in spite of all that wisdom can urge--found me
lying lifeless at the brink of the rocky depth to which Walter had
led me, and where he had left me.  Down below me lay something that
I, thank God, never saw.  They bore it home and told me it was all
that was left of Walter Linton, my husband.  But I knew better, for
had he not that evening walked hand-in-hand with me for miles?  They
told me, also, that he had fallen from the top of the rock--that it
was not a great height, but high enough for the fall to kill him
instantaneously--that most likely he was led to that fatal place,
seeking some rare plant; as a root and withered leaves were clenched
in his hand--that the notes he had placed in his pocket when he left
his home were still there--that Draycot was still mine and his
children's.  But they believe me not when I tell them that my love,
my husband, through the power of the love he bore me, could come from
the dead--could take my hand In his and lead me with him, on and on,
till he showed me where and how he died--till he saved those he loved
from utter ruin and a life of penury--till, more than all, he cleared
his own dear memory from stain and dishonor.  Yet these things were!




THRAWN JANET

BY ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON

_Robert Louis Balfour Stevenson was born in Edinburgh in 1850.  He
was graduated at Cambridge and studied law, which he abandoned for
literature.  In 1889 he settled in Samoa, where he died in 1894.  He
is the author of numerous essays, a delightful volume of poems called
"A Child's Garden of Verses," and many stories.  Stevenson's books
include: "Treasure Island"; "Kidnapped" and its sequel, "David
Balfour"; "The Black Arrow"; "Prince Otto"; "The Silverado
Squatters"; "New Arabian Nights"; "Island Nights' Entertainments";
"The Master of Ballantrae"; "An Inland Voyage"; "Travels with a
Donkey," and "The Ebb-Tide."_

_"Thrawn Janet" appeared in "The Merry Men and Other Tales."_



THRAWN JANET

By ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON

The Reverend Murdoch Soulis was long minister of the moorland parish
of Balweary, in the vale of Dule.  A severe, bleak-faced old man,
dreadful to his hearers, he dwelt in the last years of his life,
without relative or servant or any human company, in the small and
lonely manse under the Hanging Shaw.  In spite of the iron composure
of his features, his eye was wild, scared, and uncertain; and when he
dwelt, in private admonitions, on the future of the impenitent, it
seemed as if his eye pierced through the storms of time to the
terrors of eternity.  Many young persons, coming to prepare
themselves against the season of the Holy Communion, were dreadfully
affected by his talk.  He had a sermon on 1st Peter, v. and 8th, "The
devil as a roaring lion," on the Sunday after every seventeenth of
August, and he was accustomed to surpass himself upon that text both
by the appalling nature of the matter and the terror of his bearing
in the pulpit.  The children were frightened into fits, and the old
looked more than usually oracular, and were, all that day, full of
those hints that Hamlet deprecated.  The manse itself, where it stood
by the water of Dule among some thick trees, with the Shaw
overhanging it on the one side, and on the other many cold, moorish
hilltops rising toward the sky, had begun, at a very early period of
Mr. Soulis's ministry, to be avoided in the dusk hours by all who
valued themselves upon their prudence; and guidmen sitting at the
clachan alehouse shook their heads together at the thought of passing
late by that uncanny neighborhood.  There was one spot, to be more
particular, which was regarded with especial awe.  The manse stood
between the high road and the water of Dule, with a gable to each;
its back was toward the kirktown of Balweary, nearly half a mile
away; in front of it, a bare garden, hedged with thorn, occupied the
land between the river and the road.  The house was two stories high,
with two large rooms on each.  It opened not directly on the garden,
but on a causewayed path, or passage, giving on the road on the one
hand, and closed on the other by the tall willows and elders that
bordered on the stream.  And it was this strip of causeway that
enjoyed among the young parishioners of Balweary so infamous a
reputation.  The minister walked there often after dark, sometimes
groaning aloud in the instancy of his unspoken prayers; and when he
was from home, and the manse door was locked, the more daring
schoolboys ventured, with beating hearts, to "follow my leader"
across that legendary spot.

This atmosphere of terror, surrounding, as it did, a man of God of
spotless character and orthodoxy, was a common cause of wonder and
subject of inquiry among the few strangers who were led by chance or
business into that unknown, outlying country.  But many even of the
people of the parish were ignorant of the strange events which had
marked the first year of Mr. Soulis's ministrations; and among those
who were better informed, some were naturally reticent, and others
shy of that particular topic.  Now and again, only, one of the older
folk would warm into courage over his third tumbler, and recount the
cause of the minister's strange looks and solitary life.

. . . . . . . . . . . .

Fifty years syne, when Mr. Soulis cam' first into Ba'weary, he was
still a young man--a callant, the folk said--fu' o' book learnin' and
grand at the exposition, but, as was natural in sae young a man, wi'
nae leevin' experience in religion.  The younger sort were greatly
taken wi' his gifts and his gab; but auld, concerned, serious men and
women were moved even to prayer for the young man, whom they took to
be a self-deceiver, and the parish that was like to be sae
ill-supplied.  It was before the days o' the moderates--weary fa'
them; but ill things are like guid--they baith come bit by bit, a
pickle at a time; and there were folk even then that said the Lord
had left the college professors to their ain devices, an' the lads
that went to study wi' them wad hae done mair and better sittin' in a
peat-bog, like their forebears of the persecution, wi' a Bible under
their oxter and a speerit o' prayer in their heart.  There was nae
doubt, onyway, but that Mr. Soulis had been ower lang at the college.
He was careful and troubled for mony things besides the ae thing
needful.  He had a feck o' books wi' him--mair than had ever been
seen before in a' that presbytery; and a sair wark the carrier had
wi' them, for they were a' like to have smoored in the Deil's Hag
between this and Kilmackerlie.  They were books o' divinity, to be
sure, or so they ca'd them; but the serious were o' opinion there was
little service for sae mony, when the hail o' God's Word would gang
in the neuk of a plaid.  Then he wad sit half the day and half the
nicht forbye, which was scant decent--writin', nae less; and first,
they were feared he wad read his sermons; and syne it proved he was
writin' a book himsel', which way surely no fittin' for ane of his
years an' sma' experience.

Onyway it behooved him to get an auld, decent wife to keep the manse
for him an' see to his bit denners; and he was recommended to an auld
limmer--Janet M'Clour, they ca'd her--and sae far left to himsel' as
to be ower persuaded.  There was mony advised him to the contrar, for
Janet was mair than suspeckit by the best folk in Ba'weary.  Lang or
that, she had had a wean to a dragoon; she hadnae come forrit for
maybe thretty year; and bairns had seen her mumblin' to hersel' up on
Key's Loan in the gloamin', whilk was an unco time an' place for a
God-fearin' woman.  Howsoever, it was the laird himsel' that had
first tauld the minister o' Janet; and in thae days he wad have gane
a far gate to pleesure the laird.  When folk tauld him that Janet was
sib to the deil, it was a' superstition by his way of it; an' when
they cast up the Bible to him an' the witch of Endor, he wad threep
it doun their thrapples that thir days were a' gane by, and the deil
was mercifully restrained.

Weel, when it got about the clachan that Janet M'Clour was to be
servant at the manse, the folk were fair mad wi' her an' him
thegether; and some o' the guidwives had nae better to dae than get
round her door cheeks and chairge her wi' a' that was ken't again
her, frae the sodger's bairn to John Tamson's twa kye.  She was nae
great speaker; folk usually let her gang her ain gate, an' she let
them gang theirs, wi' neither Fair-guid-een nor Fair-guid-day; but
when she buckled to she had a tongue to deave the miller.  Up she
got, an' there wasnae an auld story in Ba'weary but she gart somebody
lowp for it that day; they couldnae say ae thing but she could say
twa to it; till, at the hinder end, the guidwives up and claught haud
of her, and clawed the coats aff her back, and pu'd her doun the
clachan to the water o' Dule, to see if she were a witch or no, soum
or droun.  The carline skirled till ye could hear her at the Hangin'
Shaw, and she focht like ten; there was mony a guidwife bure the mark
of her neist day, an' mony a lang day after; and just in the hettest
o' the collteshangie, wha suld come up (for his sins) but the new
minister.

"Women," said he (and he had a grand voice), "I charge you in the
Lord's name to let her go."

Janet ran to him--she was fair wud wi' terror--an' clang to him an'
prayed him, for Christ's sake, save her frae the cummers; an' they,
for their pairt, tauld him a' that was ken't, and maybe mair.

"Woman," says he to Janet, "is this true?"

"As the Lord sees me," says she, "as the Lord made me, no a word o't.
Forbye the bairn," says she, "I've been a decent woman a' my days."

"Will you," says Mr. Soulis, "in the name of God, and before me, His
unworthy minister, renounce the devil and his works?"

Weel, it wad appear that when he askit that, she gave a girn that
fairly frichtit them that saw her, an' they could hear her teeth play
dirl thegether in her chafts; but there was naething for it but the
ae way or the ither; an' Janet lifted up her hand and renounced the
deil before them a'.

"And now," said Mr. Soulis to the guidwives, "home with ye, one and
all, and pray to God for His forgiveness."

And he gied Janet his arm, though she had little on her but a sark,
and took her up the clachan to her ain door like a leddy of the land;
an' her scrieghin' and laughin' as was a scandal to be heard.

There were mony grave folk lang ower their prayers that nicht; but
when the morn cam' there was sic a fear fell upon a' Ba'weary that
the bairns hid theirsels, and even the men-folk stood and keekit frae
their doors.  For there was Janet comin' doun the clachan--her or her
likeness, nane could tell--wi' her neck thrawn, and her heid on ae
side, like a body that has been hangit, and a girn on her face like
an unstreakit corp.  By an' by they got used wi' it, and even speered
at her to ken what was wrang; but frae that day forth she couldnae
speak like a Christian woman, but slavered and played click wi' her
teeth like a pair o' shears; and frae that day forth the name o' God
cam' never on her lips.  Whiles she wad try to say it, but it
michtnae be.  Them that kenned best said least; but they never gied
that Thing the name o' Janet M'Clour; for the auld Janet, by their
way o't, was in muckle hell that day.  But the minister was neither
to haud nor to bind; he preached about naething but the folk's
cruelty that had gi'en her a stroke of the palsy; he skelpt the
bairns that meddled her; and he had her up to the manse that same
nicht and dwalled there a' his lane wi' her under the Hangin' Shaw.

Weel, time gaed by: and the idler sort commenced to think mair
lichtly o' that black business.  The minister was weel thocht o'; he
was aye late at the writing, folk wad see his can'le doun by the Dule
water after twal' at e'en; and he seemed pleased wi' himsel' and
upsitten as at first, though a' body could see that he was dwining.
As for Janet she cam' an' she gaed; if she didnae speak muckle afore,
it was reason she should speak less then; she meddled naebody; but
she was an eldritch thing to see, an' nane wad hae mistrysted wi' her
for Ba'weary glebe.

About the end o' July there cam' a spell o' weather, the like o't
never was in that countryside; it was lown an' het an' heartless; the
herds couldnae win up the Black Hill, the bairns were ower weariet to
play; an' yet it was gousty too, wi' claps o' het wund that rumm'led
in the glens, and bits o' shouers that sleekened naething.  We aye
thocht it but to thun'er on the morn; but the morn cam', and the
morn's morning, and it was aye the same uncanny weather, sair on
folks and bestial.  Of a' that were the waur, nane suffered like Mr.
Soulis; he could neither sleep nor eat, he tauld his elders; an' when
he wasnae writin' at his weary book, he wad be stravaguin' ower a'
the countryside like a man possessed, when a' body else was blythe to
keep caller ben the house.

Abune Hangin' Shaw, in the bield o' the Black Hill, there's a bit
inclosed grund wi' an iron yett; and it seems, in the auld days, that
was the kirkyaird o' Ba'weary, and consecrated by the Papists before
the blessed licht shone upon the kingdom.  It was a great howff o'
Mr. Soulis's, onyway; there he would sit an' consider his sermons;
and indeed it's a bieldy bit.  Weel, as he cam' ower the wast end o'
the Black Hill, ae day, he saw first twa, an' syne fower, an' syne
seeven corbie craws fleein' round an' round abune the auld kirkyaird.
They flew laigh and heavy, an' squawked to ither as they gaed; and it
was clear to Mr. Soulis that something had put them frae their
ordinar.  He wasnae easy fleyed, an' gaed straucht up to the wa's;
an' what suld he find there but a man, or the appearance of a man,
sittin' in the inside upon a grave.  He was of a great stature, an'
black as hell, and his e'en were singular to see.  Mr. Soulis had
heard tell o' black men, mony's the time; but there was something
unco about this black man that daunted him.  Het as he was, he took a
kind o' cauld grue in the marrow o' his banes; but up he spak for a'
that; an' says he: "My friend, are you a stranger in this place?"
The black man answered never a word; he got upon his feet, an' begude
to hirsle to the wa' on the far side; but he aye lookit at the
minister; an' the minister stood an' lookit back; till a' in a
meenute the black man was ower the wa' an' rinnin' for the bield o'
the trees.  Mr. Soulis, he hardly kenned why, ran after him; but he
was sair forjaskit wi' his walk an' the het, unhalesome weather; and
rin as he likit, he got nae mair than a glisk o' the black man amang
the birks, till he won doun to the foot o' the hillside, an' there he
saw him ance mair, gaun, hap, step, an' lowp, ower Dule water to the
manse.

Mr. Soulis wasnae weel pleased that this fearsome gangrel suld mak'
sae free wi' Ba'weary manse; an' he ran the harder, an', wet shoon,
ower the burn, an' up the walk; but the deil a black man was there to
see.  He stepped out upon the road, but there was naebody there; he
gaed a' ower the gairden, but na, nae black man.  At the hinder end,
and a bit feared as was but natural, he lifted the hasp and into the
manse; and there was Janet M'Clour before his een, wi' her thrawn
craig, and nane sae pleased to see him.  And he aye minded sinsyne,
when first he set his een upon her, he had the same cauld and deidly
grue.

"Janet," says he, "have you seen a black man?"

"A black man?" quo' she.  "Save us a'!  Ye're no wise, minister.
There's nae black man in a' Ba'weary."

But she didnae speak plain, ye maun understand; but yam-yammered,
like a powney wi' the bit in its moo.

"Weel," says he, "Janet, if there was nae black man, I have spoken
with the Accuser of the Brethren."

And he sat down like ane wi' a fever, an' his teeth chittered in his
heid.

"Hoots," says she, "think shame to yoursel', minister;" an' gied him
a drap brandy that she keept aye by her.

Syne Mr. Soulis gaed into his study amang a' his books.  It's a lang,
laigh, mirk chalmer, perishin' cauld in winter, an' no very dry even
in the tap o' the simmer, for the manse stands near the burn.  Sae
doun he sat, and thocht of a' that had come an' gane since he was in
Ba'weary, an' his hame, an' the days when he was a bairn an' ran
daffin' on the braes; and that black man aye ran in his heid like the
owercome of a sang.  Aye the mair he thocht, the mair he thocht o'
the black man.  He tried the prayer, an' the words wouldnae come to
him; an' he tried, they say, to write at his book, but he couldnae
mak' nae mair o' that.  There was whiles he thocht the black man was
at his oxter, an' the swat stood upon him cauld as well-water; and
there was other whiles, when he cam' to himsel' like a christened
bairn and minded naething.

The upshot was that he gaed to the window an' stood glowrin' at Dule
water.  The trees are unco thick, an' the water lies deep an' black
under the manse; an' there was Janet washin' the cla'es wi' her coats
kilted.  She had her back to the minister, an' he, for his pairt,
hardly kenned what he was lookin' at.  Syne she turned round, an'
shawed her face; Mr. Soulis had the same cauld grue as twice that day
afore, an' it was borne in upon him what folk said, that Janet was
deid lang syne, an' this was a bogle in her clay cauld flesh.  He
drew back a pickle and he scanned her narrowly.  She was
tramp-trampin' in the cla'es, croonin' to hersel'; and eh! Gude guide
us, but it was a fearsome face.  Whiles she sang louder, but there
was nae man born o' woman that could tell the words o' her sang; an'
whiles she lookit side-lang doun, but there was naething there for
her to look at.  There gaed a scunner through the flesh upon his
banes; and that was Heeven's advertisement.  But Mr. Soulis just
blamed himsel', he said, to think sae ill of a puir, auld afflicted
wife that hadnae a freend forby himsel'; and he put up a bit prayer
for him and her, an' drank a little caller water--for his heart rose
again the meat--an' gaed up to his naked bed in the gloaming.

That was a nicht that has never been forgotten in Ba'weary, the nicht
o' the seeventeenth of August, seeventeen hun'er' and twal'.  It had
been het afore, as I hae said, but that nicht it was hetter than
ever.  The sun gaed doun amang unco-lookin' clouds; it fell as mirk
as the pit; no a star, no a breath o' wund; ye couldnae see your han'
afore your face, and even the auld folk cuist the covers frae their
beds and lay pechin' for their breath.  Wi' a' that he had upon his
mind, it was gey and unlikely Mr. Soulis wad get muckle sleep.  He
lay an' he tummled; the gude, caller bed that he got into brunt his
very banes; whiles he slept, and whiles he waukened; whiles he heard
the time o' nicht, and whiles a tyke yowlin' up the muir, as if
somebody was deid; whiles he thocht he heard bogles claverin' in his
lug, an' whiles he saw spunkies in the room.  He behooved, he judged,
to be sick; an' sick he was--little he jaloosed the sickness.

At the hinder end, he got a clearness in his mind, sat up in his sark
on the bedside, and fell thinkin' ance mair o' the black man an'
Janet.  He couldnae weel tell how--maybe it was the cauld to his
feet--but it cam' in upon him wi' a spate that there was some
connection between thir twa, an' that either or baith o' them were
bogles.  And just at that moment, in Janet's room, which was neist to
his, there cam' a stramp o' feet as if men were wars'lin', an' then a
loud bang; an' then a wund gaed reishling round the fower quarters of
the house; an' then a' was aince mair as seelent as the grave.

Mr. Soulis was feared for neither man nor deevil.  He got his tinder
box, an' lighted a can'le, an' made three steps o't ower to Janet's
door.  It was on the hasp, an' he pushed it open, an' keeked bauldly
in.  It was a big room, as big as the minister's ain, an' plenished
wi' grand, auld, solid gear, for he had naething else.  There was a
fower-posted bed wi' auld tapestry; and a braw cabinet of aik, that
was fu' o' the minister's divinity books, an' put there to be out o'
the gate; an' a wheen duds o' Janet's lying here and there about the
floor.  But nae Janet could Mr. Soulis see; nor ony sign of a
contention.  In he gaed (an' there's few that wad ha'e followed him)
an' lookit a' round, an' listened.  But there was naethin' to be
heard, neither inside the manse nor in a' Ba'weary parish, an'
naethin' to be seen but the muckle shadows turnin' round the can'le.
An' then a' at aince, the minister's heart played dunt an' stood
stock-still; an' a cauld wund blew amang the hairs o' his heid.
Whaten a weary sicht was that for the puir man's een!  For there was
Janet hangin' frae a nail beside the auld aik cabinet: her heid aye
lay on her shoother, her een were steeked, the tongue projekit frae
her mouth, and her heels were twa feet clear abune the floor.

"God forgive us all!" thocht Mr. Soulis; "poor Janet's dead."

He cam' a step nearer to the corp; an' then his heart fair whammled
in his inside.  For by what cantrip it wad ill-beseem a man to judge,
she was hingin' frae a single nail an' by a single wursted thread for
darnin' hose.

It's an awfu' thing to be your lane at nicht wi' siccan prodigies o'
darkness; but Mr. Soulis was strong in the Lord.  He turned an' gaed
his ways oot o' that room, and lockit the door ahint him; and step by
step, doon the stairs, as heavy as leed; and set doon the can'le on
the table at the stairfoot.  He couldnae pray, he couldnae think, he
was dreepin' wi' caul' swat, an' naething could he hear but the
dunt-dunt-duntin' o' his ain heart.  He micht maybe have stood there
an hour, or maybe twa, he minded sae little; when a' o' a sudden he
heard a laigh, uncanny steer upstairs; a foot gaed to an' fro in the
cha'mer whaur the corp was hingin'; syne the door was opened, though
he minded weel that he had lockit it; an' syne there was a step upon
the landin', an' it seemed to him as if the corp was lookin' ower the
rail and doun upon him whaur he stood.

He took up the can'le again (for he couldnae want the licht) and, as
saftly as ever he could, gaed straucht out o' the manse an' to the
far end o' the causeway.  It was aye pit-mirk; the flame o' the
can'le, when he set it on the grund, brunt steedy and clear as in a
room; naething moved, but the Dule water seepin' and sabbin' doon the
glen, an' yon unhaly footstep that cam' ploddin' doun the stairs
inside the manse.  He kenned the foot ower weel, for it was Janet's;
and at ilka step that cam' a wee thing nearer, the cauld got deeper
in his vitals.  He commended his soul to Him that made an' keepit
him; "and O Lord," said he, "give me strength this night to war
against the powers of evil."

By this time the foot was comin' through the passage for the door; he
could hear a hand skirt alang the wa', as if the fearsome thing was
feelin' for its way.  The saughs tossed an' maned thegether, a lang
sigh cam' ower the hills, the flame o' the can'le was blawn aboot;
an' there stood the corp of Thrawn Janet, wi' her grogram goun an'
her black mutch, wi' the heid aye upon the shouther, an' the girn
still upon the face o't--leevin', ye wad hae said--deid, as Mr.
Soulis weel kenned--upon the threshold o' the manse.

It's a strange thing that the saul of man should be that thirled into
his perishable body; but the minister saw that, an' his heart didnae
break.

She didnae stand there lang; she began to move again an' cam' slowly
toward Mr. Soulis whaur he stood under the saughs.  A' the life o'
his body, a' the strength o' his speerit, were glowerin' frae his
een.  It seemed she was gaun to speak, but wanted words, an' made a
sign wi' the left hand.  There cam' a clap o' wund, like a cat's
fuff; oot gaed the can'le, the saughs skrieghed like folk; an' Mr.
Soulis kenned that, live or die, this was the end o't.

"Witch, beldame, devil!" he cried, "I charge you, by the power of
God, begone--if you be dead, to the grave--if you be damned, to hell."

An' at that moment the Lord's ain hand out o' the Heevens struck the
Horror whaur it stood; the auld, deid, desecrated corp o' the
witch-wife, sae lang keepit frae the grave and hirsled round by
deils, lowed up like a brunstane spunk and fell in ashes to the
grund; the thunder followed, peal on dirling peal, the rairing rain
upon the back o' that; and Mr. Soulis lowped through the garden
hedge, and ran, wi' skelloch upon skelloch, for the clachan.

That same mornin', John Christie saw the Black Man pass the Muckle
Cairn as it was chappin' six; before eicht, he gaed by the
change-house at Knockdow; an' no lang after, Sandy M'Lellan saw him
gaun linkin' doun the braes frae Kilmackerlie.  There's little doubt
but it was him that dwalled sae lang in Janet's body; but he was awa'
at last; and sinsyne the deil has never fashed us in Ba'weary.

But it was a sair dispensation for the minister; lang, lang he lay
ravin' in his bed; and frae that hour to this, he was the man ye ken
the day.




A CHRISTMAS CAROL

BY CHARLES DICKENS

_Charles Dickens was a stanch friend not only of the child but of all
humanity.  No writer, perhaps, has succeeded in portraying so
strikingly the humorous and pathetic in human character.  Much of
Dickens's reputation for ability in this direction is due to his
success with the particular story given herewith.  The man or woman
who does not know Scrooge, the Ghost that scared him half to death,
and what this story stands for, has still something to learn, both of
literature and of life._



A CHRISTMAS CAROL

By CHARLES DICKENS


STAVE ONE

_Marley's Ghost_

Marley was dead: to begin with.  There is no doubt whatever about
that.  The register of his burial was signed by the clergyman, the
clerk, the undertaker, and the chief mourner.  Scrooge signed it: and
Scrooge's name was good upon 'Change, for anything he chose to put
his hand to.  Old Marley was dead as a doornail.

Mind!  I don't mean to say that I know, of my own knowledge, what
there is particularly dead about a door-nail.  I might have been
inclined, myself, to regard a coffin-nail as the deadest piece of
ironmongery in the trade.  But the wisdom of our ancestors is in the
simile; and my unhallowed hands shall not disturb it, or the
Country's done for.  You will therefore permit me to repeat,
emphatically, that Marley was dead as a door-nail.

Scrooge knew he was dead?  Of course he did.  How could it be
otherwise?  Scrooge and he were partners for I don't know how many
years.  Scrooge was his sole executor, his sole administrator, his
sole assign, his sole residuary legatee, his sole friend, and sole
mourner.  And even Scrooge was not so dreadfully cut up by the sad
event, but that he was an excellent man of business on the very day
of the funeral, and solemnized it with an undoubted bargain.

The mention of Marley's funeral brings me back to the point I started
from.  There is no doubt that Marley was dead.  This must be
distinctly understood, or nothing wonderful can come of the story I
am going to relate.  If we were not perfectly convinced that Hamlet's
Father died before the play began, there would be nothing more
remarkable in his taking a stroll at night, in an easterly wind, upon
his own ramparts, than there would be in any other middle-aged
gentleman rashly turning out after dark in a breezy spot--say Saint
Paul's Churchyard for instance--literally to astonish his son's weak
mind.

Scrooge never painted out Old Marley's name.  There it stood, years
afterward, above the warehouse door: Scrooge and Marley.  The firm
was known as Scrooge and Marley.  Sometimes people new to the
business called Scrooge Scrooge, and sometimes Marley, but he
answered to both names: it was all the same to him.

Oh!  But he was a tight-fisted hand at the grindstone, Scrooge! a
squeezing, wrenching, grasping, scraping, clutching, covetous, old
sinner!  Hard and sharp as flint, from which no steel had ever struck
out generous fire; secret, and self-contained, and solitary as an
oyster.  The cold within him froze his old features, nipped his
pointed nose, shriveled his cheek, stiffened his gait; made his eyes
red, his thin lips blue; and spoke out shrewdly in his grating voice.
A frosty rime was on his head, and on his eyebrows, and his wiry
chin.  He carried his own low temperature always about with him; he
iced his office in the dog-days; and didn't thaw it one degree at
Christmas.

External heat and cold had little influence on Scrooge.  No warmth
could warm, nor wintry weather chill him.  No wind that blew was
bitterer than he, no falling snow was more intent upon its purpose,
no pelting rain less open to entreaty.  Foul weather didn't know
where to have him.  The heaviest rain, and snow, and hail, and sleet,
could boast of the advantage over him in only one respect.  They
often "came down" handsomely, and Scrooge never did.

Nobody ever stopped him in the street to say, with gladsome looks,
"My dear Scrooge, how are you?  When will you come to see me?"  No
beggars implored him to bestow a trifle, no children asked him what
it was o'clock, no man or woman ever once in all his life inquired
the way to such and such a place, of Scrooge.  Even the blind men's
dogs appeared to know him; and when they saw him coming on, would tug
their owners into doorways and up courts; and then would wag their
tails as though they said, "No eye at all is better than an evil eye,
dark master!"

But what did Scrooge care?  It was the very thing he liked.  To edge
his way along the crowded paths of life, warning all human sympathy
to keep its distance, was what the knowing ones call "nuts" to
Scrooge.

Once upon a time--of all the good days in the year, on Christmas
Eve--old Scrooge sat busy in his counting-house.  It was cold, bleak,
biting weather: foggy withal: and he could hear the people in the
court outside go wheezing up and down, beating their hands upon their
breasts, and stamping their feet upon the pavement stones to warm
them.  The city clocks had only just gone three, but it was quite
dark already: it had not been light all day: and candles were flaring
in the windows of the neighboring offices, like ruddy smears upon the
palpable brown air.  The fog came pouring in at every chink and
keyhole, and was so dense without, that although the court was of the
narrowest, the houses opposite were mere phantoms.  To see the dingy
cloud come drooping down, obscuring everything, one might have
thought that Nature lived hard by, and was brewing on a large scale.

The door of Scrooge's counting-house was open, that he might keep his
eye upon his clerk, who in a dismal little cell beyond, a sort of
tank, was copying letters.  Scrooge had a very small fire, but the
clerk's fire was so very much smaller that it looked like one coal.
But he couldn't replenish it, for Scrooge kept the coal-box in his
own room; and so surely as the clerk came in with the shovel, the
master predicted that it would be necessary for them to part.
Wherefore the clerk put on his white comforter, and tried to warm
himself at the candle; in which effort, not being a man of a strong
imagination, he failed.

"A merry Christmas, uncle!  God save you!" cried a cheerful voice.
It was the voice of Scrooge's nephew, who came upon him so quickly
that this was the first intimation he had of his approach.

"Bah!" said Scrooge, "humbug!"

He had so heated himself with rapid walking in the fog and frost,
this nephew of Scrooge's, that he was all in a glow; his face was
ruddy and handsome!  his eyes sparkled, and his breath smoked again.

"Christmas a humbug, uncle!" said Scrooge's nephew.  "You don't mean
that, I am sure."

"I do," said Scrooge.  "Merry Christmas!  What right have you to be
merry?  What reason have you to be merry?  You're poor enough."

"Come, then," returned the nephew gaily.  "What right have you to be
dismal?  What reason have you to be morose?  You're rich enough."

Scrooge having no better answer ready on the spur of the moment, said
"Bah!" again; and followed it up with "Humbug!"

"Don't be cross, uncle," said the nephew.

"What else can I be," returned the uncle, "when I live in such a
world of fools as this?  Merry Christmas!  Out upon merry Christmas!
What's Christmas time to you but a time for paying bills without
money; a time for finding yourself a year older, but not an hour
richer; a time for balancing your books and having every item in 'em
through a round dozen of months presented dead against you?  If I
could work my will," said Scrooge indignantly, "every idiot who goes
about with 'Merry Christmas' on his lips should be boiled with his
own pudding, and buried with a stake of holly through his heart.  He
should!"

"Uncle!" pleaded the nephew.

"Nephew!" returned the uncle sternly, "keep Christmas in your own
way, and let me keep it in mine."

"Keep it!" repeated Scrooge's nephew.  "But you don't keep it."

"Let me leave it alone, then," said Scrooge.  "Much good may it do
you!  Much good it has ever done you!"

"There are many things from which I might have derived good, by which
I have not profited, I dare say," returned the nephew; "Christmas
among the rest.  But I am sure I have always thought of Christmas
time, when it has come round--apart from the veneration due to its
sacred name and origin, if anything belonging to it can be apart from
that--as a good time: a kind, forgiving, charitable, pleasant time:
the only time I know of, in the long calendar of the year, when men
and women seem by one consent to open their shut-up hearts freely,
and to think of people below them as if they really were
fellow-passengers to the grave, and not another race of creatures
bound on other journeys.  And therefore, uncle, though it has never
put a scrap of gold or silver in my pocket, I believe that it _has_
done me good, and _will_ do me good; and I say, God bless it!"

The clerk in the Tank involuntarily applauded: becoming immediately
sensible of the impropriety, he poked the fire, and extinguished the
last frail spark forever.

"Let me hear another sound from _you_," said Scrooge, "and you'll
keep your Christmas by losing your situation.  You're quite a
powerful speaker, sir," he added, turning to his nephew.  "I wonder
you don't go into Parliament."

"Don't be angry, uncle.  Come!  Dine with us to-morrow."

Scrooge said that he would see him--yes, indeed he did.  He went the
whole length of the expression, and said that he would see him in
that extremity first.

"But why?" cried Scrooge's nephew.  "Why?"

"Why did you get married?" said Scrooge.

"Because I fell in love."

"Because you fell in love!" growled Scrooge, as if that were the only
one thing in the world more ridiculous than a merry Christmas.
"Good-afternoon!"

"Nay, uncle, but you never came to see me before that happened.  Why
give it as a reason for not coming now?"

"Good-afternoon," said Scrooge.

"I want nothing from you; I ask nothing of you; why can not we be
friends?"

"Good-afternoon," said Scrooge.

"I am sorry, with all my heart, to find you so resolute.  We have
never had any quarrel to which I have been a party.  But I have made
the trial in homage to Christmas, and I'll keep my Christmas humor to
the last.  So a Merry Christmas, uncle!"

"Good-afternoon!" said Scrooge.

"And a Happy New Year!"

"Good-afternoon!" said Scrooge.

His nephew left the room without an angry word, notwithstanding.  He
stopped at the outer door to bestow the greetings of the season on
the clerk, who, cold as he was, was warmer than Scrooge; for he
returned them cordially.

"There's another fellow," muttered Scrooge, who overheard him; "my
clerk, with fifteen shillings a week, and a wife and family, talking
about a merry Christmas.  I'll retire to Bedlam."

This lunatic, in letting Scrooge's nephew out, had let two other
people in.  They were portly gentlemen, pleasant to behold, and now
stood, with their hats off, in Scrooge's office.  They had books and
papers in their hands, and bowed to him.

"Scrooge and Marley's, I believe," said one of the gentlemen,
referring to his list.  "Have I the pleasure of addressing Mr.
Scrooge, or Mr. Marley?"

"Mr. Marley has been dead these seven years," Scrooge replied.  "He
died seven years ago, this very night."

"We have no doubt his liberality is well represented by his surviving
partner," said the gentleman, presenting his credentials.

It certainly was; for they had been two kindred spirits.  At the
ominous word "liberality," Scrooge frowned, and shook his head, and
handed the credentials back.

"At this festive season of the year, Mr. Scrooge," said the
gentleman, taking up a pen, "it is more than usually desirable that
we should make some slight provision for the poor and destitute, who
suffer greatly at the present time.  Many thousands are in want of
common necessaries; hundreds of thousands are in want of common
comforts, sir."

"Are there no prisons?" asked Scrooge.

"Plenty of prisons," said the gentleman, laying down the pen again.

"And the Union workhouses?" demanded Scrooge.  "Are they still in
operation?"

"They are.  Still," returned the gentleman, "I wish I could say they
were not."

"The Treadmill and the Poor Law are in full vigor, then?" said
Scrooge.

"Both very busy, sir."

"Oh!  I was afraid, from what you said at first, that something had
occurred to stop them in their useful course," said Scrooge.  "I'm
very glad to hear it."

"Under the impression that they scarcely furnish Christian cheer of
mind or body to the multitude," returned the gentleman, "a few of us
are endeavoring to raise a fund to buy the Poor some meat and drink,
and means of warmth.  We choose this time, because it is a time, of
all others, when Want is keenly felt, and Abundance rejoices.  What
shall I put you down for?"

"Nothing!" Scrooge replied.

"You wish to be anonymous?"

"I wish to be left alone," said Scrooge.  "Since you ask me what I
wish, gentlemen, that is my answer.  I don't make merry myself at
Christmas, and I can't afford to make idle people merry.  I help to
support the establishments I have mentioned: they cost enough: and
those who are badly off must go there."

"Many can't go there; and many would rather die."

"If they would rather die," said Scrooge, "they had better do it, and
decrease the surplus population.  Besides--excuse me--I don't know
that."

"But you might know it," observed the gentleman.

"It's not my business," Scrooge returned.  "It's enough for a man to
understand his own business, and not to interfere with other
people's.  Mine occupies me constantly.  Good afternoon, gentlemen!"

Seeing clearly that it would be useless to pursue their point, the
gentlemen withdrew.  Scrooge resumed his labors with an improved
opinion of himself, and in a more facetious temper than was usual
with him.

Meanwhile the fog and darkness thickened so that people ran about
with flaring links, proffering their services to go before horses in
carriages and conduct them on their way.  The ancient tower of a
church, whose gruff old bell was always peeping slyly down at Scrooge
out of a gothic window in the wall, became invisible, and struck the
hours and quarters in the clouds, with tremulous vibrations afterward
as if its teeth were chattering in its frozen head up there.  The
cold became intense.  In the main street at the corner of the court,
some laborers were repairing the gas-pipes, and had lighted a great
fire in a brazier, round which a party of ragged men and boys were
gathered: warming their hands and winking their eyes before the blaze
in rapture.  The water-plug being left in solitude, its overflowings
sullenly congealed, and turned to misanthropic ice.  The brightness
of the shops, where holly sprigs and berries crackled in the lamp
heat of the windows, made pale faces ruddy as they passed.
Poulterers' and grocers' trades became a splendid joke: a glorious
pageant, with which it was next to impossible to believe that such
dull principles as bargain and sale had anything to do.  The Lord
Mayor, in the stronghold of the mighty Mansion House, gave orders to
his fifty cooks and butlers to keep Christmas as a Lord Mayor's
household should; and even the little tailor, whom he had fined five
shillings on the previous Monday for being drunk and bloodthirsty in
the streets, stirred up to-morrow's pudding in his garret, while his
lean wife and the baby sallied out to buy the beef.

Foggier yet, and colder!  Piercing, searching, biting cold.  If the
good Saint Dunstan had but nipped the Evil Spirit's nose with a touch
of such weather as that, instead of using his familiar weapons, then
indeed he would have roared to lusty purpose.  The owner of one scant
young nose, gnawed and mumbled by the hungry cold as bones are gnawed
by dogs, stooped down at Scrooge's keyhole to regale him with a
Christmas carol: but at the first sound of

  "God bless you, merry gentleman!
  May nothing you dismay!"

Scrooge seized the ruler with such energy of action that the singer
fled in terror, leaving the keyhole to the fog and even more
congenial frost.

At length the hour of shutting up the counting-house arrived.  With
an ill-will Scrooge dismounted from his stool, and tacitly admitted
the fact to the expectant clerk in the Tank, who instantly snuffed
his candle out, and put on his hat.

"You'll want all day to-morrow, I suppose?" said Scrooge.

"If quite convenient, sir."

"It's not convenient," said Scrooge, "and it's not fair.  If I was to
stop half-a-crown for it, you'd think yourself ill-used, I'll be
bound?"

The clerk smiled faintly.

"And yet," said Scrooge, "you don't think me ill-used, when I pay a
day's wages for no work."

The clerk observed that it was only once a year.

"A poor excuse for picking a man's pocket every twenty-fifth of
December!" said Scrooge, buttoning his great-coat to the chin.  "But
I suppose you must have the whole day.  Be here all the earlier next
morning!"

The clerk promised that he would; and Scrooge walked out with a
growl.  The office was closed in a twinkling, and the clerk, with the
long ends of his white comforter dangling below his waist (for he
boasted no great-coat), went down a slide on Cornhill, at the end of
a lane of boys, twenty times, in honor of its being Christmas Eve,
and then ran home to Camden Town as hard as he could pelt, to play at
blindman's buff.

Scrooge took his melancholy dinner in his usual melancholy tavern;
and having read all the newspapers, and beguiled the rest of the
evening with his banker's-book, went home to bed.  He lived in
chambers which had once belonged to his deceased partner.  They were
a gloomy suite of rooms, in a lowering pile of building up a yard,
where it had so little business to be, that one could scarcely help
fancying it must have run there when it was a young house, playing at
hide-and-seek with other houses, and have forgotten the way out
again.  It was old enough now, and dreary enough, for nobody lived in
it but Scrooge, the other rooms being all let out as offices.  The
yard was so dark that even Scrooge, who knew its every stone, was
fain to grope with his hands.  The fog and frost so hung about the
black old gateway of the house that it seemed as if the Genius of the
Weather sat in mournful meditation on the threshold.

Now, it is a fact, that there was nothing at all particular about the
knocker on the door, except that it was very large.  It is also a
fact, that Scrooge had seen it, night and morning, during his whole
residence in that place; also that Scrooge had as little of what is
called fancy about him as any man in the City of London, even
including--which is a bold word--the corporation, aldermen, and
livery.  Let it also be borne in mind that Scrooge had not bestowed
one thought on Marley, since his last mention of his seven-years'
dead partner that afternoon.  And then let any man explain to me, if
he can, how it happened that Scrooge, having his key in the lock of
the door, saw in the knocker, without its undergoing any intermediate
process of change: not a knocker, but Marley's face.

Marley's face.  It was not in impenetrable shadow as the other
objects in the yard were, but had a dismal light about it, like a bad
lobster in a dark cellar.  It was not angry or ferocious, but looked
at Scrooge as Marley used to look: with ghostly spectacles turned up
on its ghostly forehead.  The hair was curiously stirred, as if by
breath or hot air; and, though the eyes were wide open, they were
perfectly motionless.  That, and its livid color, made it horrible;
but its horror seemed to be in spite of the face and beyond its
control, rather than a part of its own expression.

As Scrooge looked fixedly at this phenomenon, it was a knocker again.

To say that he was not startled, or that his blood was not conscious
of a terrible sensation to which it had been a stranger from infancy,
would be untrue.  But he put his hand upon the key he had
relinquished, turned it sturdily, walked in, and lighted his candle.

He _did_ pause, with a moment's irresolution, before he shut the
door; and he _did_ look cautiously behind it first, as if he
half-expected to be terrified with the sight of Marley's pigtail
sticking out into the hall.  But there was nothing on the back of the
door, except the screws and nuts that held the knocker on; so he said
"Pooh, pooh!" and closed it with a bang.

The sound resounded through the house like thunder.  Every room
above, and every cask in the wine-merchant's cellars below, appeared
to have a separate peal of echoes of its own.  Scrooge was not a man
to be frightened by echoes.  He fastened the door, and walked across
the hall, and up the stairs: slowly, too, trimming his candle as he
went.

You may talk vaguely about driving a coach-and-six up a good old
flight of stairs, or through a bad young Act of Parliament; but I
mean to say you might have got a hearse up that staircase, and taken
it broadwise, with the splinter-bar toward the wall, and the door
toward the balustrades: and done it easy.  There was plenty of width
for that, and room to spare; which is perhaps the reason why Scrooge
thought he saw a locomotive hearse going on before him in the gloom.
Half-a-dozen gas-lamps out of the street wouldn't have lighted the
entry too well, so you may suppose that it was pretty dark with
Scrooge's dip.

Up Scrooge went, not caring a button for that: darkness is cheap, and
Scrooge liked it.  But before he shut his heavy door, he walked
through his rooms to see that all was right.  He had just enough
recollection of the face to desire to do that.

Sitting-room, bedroom, lumber-room.  All as they should be.  Nobody
under the table, nobody under the sofa; a small fire in the grate;
spoon and basin ready; and the little saucepan of gruel (Scrooge had
a cold in his head) upon the Bob.  Nobody under the bed; nobody in
the closet; nobody in his dressing-gown, which was hanging up in a
suspicious attitude against the wall.  Lumber-room as usual.  Old
fireguard, old shoes, two fish-baskets, washing-stand on three legs,
and a poker.

Quite satisfied, he closed his door, and locked himself in;
double-locked himself in, which was not his custom.  Thus secured
against surprise, he took off his cravat; put on his dressing-gown
and slippers, and his nightcap; and sat down before the fire to take
his gruel.

It was a very low fire indeed; nothing on such a bitter night.  He
was obliged to sit close to it, and brood over it, before he could
extract the least sensation of warmth from such a handful of fuel.
The fireplace was an old one, built by some Dutch merchant long ago,
and paved all round with quaint Dutch tiles, designed to illustrate
the Scriptures.  There were Cains and Abels, Pharaohs' daughters,
Queens of Sheba, Angelic messengers descending through the air on
clouds like feather-beds, Abrahams, Belshazzars, Apostles putting off
to sea in butter-boats, hundreds of figures, to attract his thoughts;
and yet that face of Marley, seven years dead, came like the ancient
Prophet's rod, and swallowed up the whole.  If each smooth tile had
been a blank at first, with power to shape some picture on its
surface from the disjointed fragments of his thoughts, there would
have been a copy of old Marley's head on every one.

"Humbug!" said Scrooge; and walked across the room.

After several turns, he sat down again.  As he threw his head back in
the chair, his glance happened to rest upon a bell, a disused bell,
that hung in the room, and communicated for some purpose now
forgotten with a chamber in the highest story of the building.  It
was with great astonishment, and with a strange, inexplicable dread,
that as he looked, he saw this bell begin to swing.  It swung so
softly in the outset that it scarcely made a sound; but soon it rang
out loudly, and so did every bell in the house.

This might have lasted half a minute, or a minute, but it seemed an
hour.  The bells ceased as they had begun, together.  They were
succeeded by a clanking noise, deep down below; as if some person
were dragging a heavy chain over the casks in the wine-merchant's
cellar.  Scrooge then remembered to have heard that ghosts in haunted
houses were described as dragging chains.

The cellar-door flew open with a booming sound, and then he heard the
noise much louder, on the floors below; then coming up the stairs;
then coming straight toward his door.

"It's humbug still!" said Scrooge.  "I won't believe it."

His color changed though, when, without a pause, it came on through
the heavy door, and passed into the room before his eyes.  Upon its
coming in, the dying flame leaped up, as though it cried "I know him!
Marley's Ghost!" and fell again.

The same face; the very same.  Marley in his pigtail, usual
waistcoat, tights, and boots; the tassels on the latter bristling,
like his pigtail, and his coat-skirts, and the hair upon his head.
The chain he drew was clasped about his middle.  It was long, and
wound about him like a tail; and it was made (for Scrooge observed it
closely) of cash-boxes, keys, padlocks, ledgers, deeds, and heavy
purses wrought in steel.  His body was transparent; so that Scrooge,
observing him, and looking through his waistcoat, could see the two
buttons on his coat behind.

Scrooge had often heard it said that Marley had no bowels, but he had
never believed it until now.

No, nor did he believe it even now.  Though he looked the phantom
through and through, and saw it standing before him; though he felt
the chilling influence of its death-cold eyes; and marked the very
texture of the folded kerchief bound about its head and chin, which
wrapper he had not observed before: he was still incredulous, and
fought against his senses.

"How now!" said Scrooge, caustic and cold as ever.  "What do you want
with me?"

"Much!"--Marley's voice, no doubt about it.

"Who are you?"

"Ask me who I _was_."

"Who _were_ you, then?" said Scrooge, raising his voice.  "You're
particular--for a shade."  He was going to say "_to_ a shade," but
substituted this, as more appropriate.

"In life I was your partner, Jacob Marley."

"Can you--can you sit down?" asked Scrooge, looking doubtfully at him.

"I can."

"Do it, then."

Scrooge asked the question, because he didn't know whether a ghost so
transparent might find himself in a condition to take a chair; and
felt that in the event of its being impossible, it might involve the
necessity of an embarrassing explanation.  But the Ghost sat down on
the opposite side of the fireplace, as if he were quite used to it.

"You don't believe in me," observed the Ghost.

"I don't," said Scrooge.

"What evidence would you have of my reality beyond that of your
senses?"

"I don't know," said Scrooge.

"Why do you doubt your senses?"

"Because," said Scrooge, "a little thing affects them.  A slight
disorder of the stomach makes them cheats.  You may be an undigested
bit of beef, a blot of mustard, a crumb of cheese, a fragment of an
underdone potato.  There's more of gravy than of grave about you,
whatever you are!"

Scrooge was not much in the habit of cracking jokes, nor did he feel,
in his heart, by any means waggish then.  The truth is, that he tried
to be smart, as a means of distracting his own attention, and keeping
down his terror; for the spectre's voice disturbed the very marrow in
his bones.

To sit, staring at those fixed, glazed eyes, in silence for a moment,
would play, Scrooge felt, the very deuce with him.  There was
something very awful, too, in the spectre's being provided with an
infernal atmosphere of its own.  Scrooge could not feel it himself,
but this was clearly the case; for though the Ghost sat perfectly
motionless, its hair, and skirts, and tassels, were still agitated as
by the hot vapor from an oven.

"You see this toothpick?" said Scrooge, returning quickly to the
charge, for the reason just assigned; and wishing, though it were
only for a second, to divert the vision's stony gaze from himself.

"I do," replied the Ghost.

"You are not looking at it," said Scrooge.

"But I see it," said the Ghost, "notwithstanding."

"Well!" returned Scrooge.  "I have but to swallow this, and be for
the rest of my days persecuted by a legion of goblins all of my
creation.  Humbug, I tell you--humbug!"

At this the spirit raised a frightful cry, and shook its chain with
such a dismal and appalling noise, that Scrooge held on tight to his
chair, to save himself from falling in a swoon.  But how much greater
was his horror, when, the phantom taking off the bandage round its
head, as if it were too warm to wear indoors, its lower jaw dropped
down upon its breast!

Scrooge fell upon his knees and clasped his hands before his face.

"Mercy!" he said.  "Dreadful apparition, why do you trouble me?"

"Man of the worldly mind!" replied the Ghost, "do you believe in me
or not?"

"I do," said Scrooge.  "I must.  But why do spirits walk the earth,
and why do they come to me?"

"It is required of every man," the Ghost returned, "that the spirit
within him should walk abroad among his fellow-men, and travel far
and wide; and if that spirit goes not forth in life, it is condemned
to do so after death.  It is doomed to wander through the world--oh,
woe is me!--and witness what it can not share, but might have shared
on earth, and turned to happiness!"

Again the spectre raised a cry, and shook its chain, and wrung its
shadowy hands.

"You are fettered," said Scrooge, trembling.  "Tell me why?"

"I wear the chain I forged in life," replied the Ghost.  "I made it
link by link, and yard by yard; I girded it on of my own free will,
and of my own free will I wore it.  Is its pattern strange to _you_"

Scrooge trembled more and more.

"Or would you know," pursued the Ghost, "the weight and length of the
strong coil you bear yourself?  It was full as heavy, and as long as
this, seven Christmas Eves ago.  You have labored on it, since.  It
is a ponderous chain!"

Scrooge glanced about him on the floor, in the expectation of finding
himself surrounded by some fifty or sixty fathoms of iron cable: but
he could see nothing.

"Jacob," he said imploringly.  "Old Jacob Marley, tell me more.
Speak comfort to me, Jacob."

"I have none to give," the Ghost replied.  "It comes from other
regions, Ebenezer Scrooge, and is conveyed by other ministers, to
other kinds of men.  Nor can I tell you what I would.  A very little
more, is all permitted to me.  I can not rest, I can not stay, I can
not linger anywhere.  My spirit never walked beyond our
counting-house--mark me!--in life my spirit never roved beyond the
narrow limits of our money-changing hole; and weary journeys lie
before me!"

It was a habit with Scrooge, whenever he became thoughtful, to put
his hands in his breeches pockets.  Pondering on what the Ghost had
said, he did so now, but without lifting up his eyes, or getting off
his knees.

"You must have been very slow about it, Jacob," Scrooge observed, in
a business-like manner, though with humility and deference.

"Slow!" the Ghost repeated.

"Seven years dead," mused Scrooge.  "And traveling all the time!"

"The whole time," said the Ghost.  "No rest, no peace.  Incessant
torture of remorse."

"You travel fast?" said Scrooge.

"On the wings of the wind," replied the Ghost.

"You might have got over a great quantity of ground in seven years,"
said Scrooge.

The Ghost, on hearing this, set up another cry, and clanked its chain
so hideously in the dead silence of the night, that the Ward would
have been justified in indicting it for a nuisance.

"Oh! captive, bound, and double-ironed," cried the phantom, "not to
know, that ages of incessant labor, by immortal creatures, for this
earth must pass into eternity before the good of which it is
susceptible is all developed.  Not to know that any Christian spirit
working kindly in its little sphere, whatever it may be, will find
its mortal life too short for its vast means of usefulness.  Not to
know that no space of regret can make amends for one life's
opportunity misused!  Yet such was I!  Oh! such was I!"

"But you were always a good man of business, Jacob," faltered
Scrooge, who now began to apply this to himself.

"Business!" cried the Ghost, wringing his hands again.  "Mankind was
my business.  The common welfare was my business; charity, mercy,
forbearance, and benevolence, were, all, my business.  The dealings
of my trade were but a drop of water in the comprehensive ocean of my
business!"

It held up its chain at arm's-length, as if that were the cause of
all its unavailing grief, and flung it heavily upon the ground again.

"At this time of the rolling year," the spectre said, "I suffer most.
Why did I walk through crowds of fellow-beings with my eyes turned
down, and never raise them to that blessed Star which led the Wise
Men to a poor abode!  Were there no poor homes to which its light
would have conducted _me_!"

Scrooge was very much dismayed to hear the spectre going on at this
rate, and began to quake exceedingly.

"Hear me!" cried the Ghost.  "My time is nearly gone."

"I will," said Scrooge.  "But don't be hard upon me!  Don't be
flowery, Jacob!  Pray!"

"How it is that I appear before you in a shape that you can see, I
may not tell.  I have sat invisible beside you many and many a day."

It was not an agreeable idea.  Scrooge shivered, and wiped the
perspiration from his brow.

"That is no light part of my penance," pursued the Ghost.  "I am here
to-night to warn you that you have yet a chance and hope of escaping
my fate.  A chance and hope of my procuring, Ebenezer."

"You were always a good friend to me," said Scrooge.  "Thank'ee!"

"You will be haunted," resumed the Ghost, "by Three Spirits."

Scrooge's countenance fell almost as low as the Ghost's had done.

"Is that the chance and hope you mentioned, Jacob?" he demanded, in a
faltering voice.

"It is."

"I--I think I'd rather not," said Scrooge.

"Without their visits," said the Ghost, "you can not hope to shun the
path I tread.  Expect the first to-morrow, when the bell tolls one."

"Couldn't I take 'em all at once, and have it over, Jacob?" hinted
Scrooge.

"Expect the second on the next night at the same hour.  The third
upon the next night when the last stroke of twelve has ceased to
vibrate.  Look to see me no more; and look that, for your own sake,
you remember what has passed between us!"

When it had said these words, the spectre took its wrapper from the
table, and bound it round its head, as before.  Scrooge knew this, by
the smart sound its teeth made, when the jaws were brought together
by the bandage.  He ventured to raise his eyes again, and found his
supernatural visitor confronting him in an erect attitude, with its
chain wound over and about its arm.

The apparition walked backward from him; and at every step it took
the window raised itself a little, so that when the spectre reached
it it was wide open.  It beckoned Scrooge to approach, which he did.
When they were within two paces of each other, Marley's Ghost held up
its hand, warning him to come no nearer.  Scrooge stopped.

Not so much in obedience, as in surprise and fear: for on the raising
of the hand, he became sensible of confused noises in the air;
incoherent sounds of lamentation and regret; wailings inexpressibly
sorrowful and self-accusatory.  The spectre, after listening for a
moment, joined in the mournful dirge; and floated out upon the bleak,
dark night.

Scrooge followed to the window, desperate in his curiosity.  He
looked out.

The air was filled with phantoms, wandering hither and thither in
restless haste, and moaning as they went.  Every one of them wore
chains like Marley's Ghost; some few (they might be guilty
governments) were linked together; none were free.  Many had been
personally known to Scrooge in their lives.  He had been quite
familiar with one old ghost, in a white waistcoat, with a monstrous
iron safe attached to its ankle, who cried piteously at being unable
to assist a wretched woman with an infant, whom it saw below, upon a
doorstep.  The misery with them all was, clearly, that they sought to
interfere, for good, in human matters, and had lost the power forever.

Whether these creatures faded into mist, or mist enshrouded them, he
could not tell.  But they and their spirit voices faded together; and
the night became as it had been when he walked home.

Scrooge closed the window, and examined the door by which the Ghost
had entered.  It was double-locked, as he had locked it with his own
hands, and the bolts were undisturbed.  He tried to say "Humbug!" but
stopped at the first syllable.  And being, from the emotion he had
undergone, or the fatigues of the day, or his glimpse of the
Invisible World, or the dull conversation of the Ghost, or the
lateness of the hour, much in need of repose, went straight to bed,
without undressing, and fell asleep upon the instant.



STAVE TWO

_The First of the Three Spirits_

When Scrooge awoke, it was so dark that, looking out of bed, he could
scarcely distinguish the transparent window from the opaque walls of
his chamber.  He was endeavoring to pierce the darkness with his
ferret eyes, when the chimes of a neighboring church struck the four
quarters.  So he listened for the hour.

To his great astonishment the heavy bell went on from six to seven,
and from seven to eight, and regularly up to twelve; then stopped.
Twelve!  It was past two when he went to bed.  The clock was wrong.
An icicle must have got into the works.  Twelve!

He touched the spring of his repeater, to correct this most
preposterous clock.  Its rapid little pulse beat twelve; and stopped.

"Why, it isn't possible," said Scrooge, "that I can have slept
through a whole day and far into another night.  It isn't possible
that anything has happened to the sun, and this is twelve at noon!"

The idea being an alarming one, he scrambled out of bed, and groped
his way to the window.  He was obliged to rub the frost off with the
sleeve of his dressing-gown before he could see anything; and could
see very little then.  All he could make out was that it was still
very foggy and extremely cold, and that there was no noise of people
running to and fro, and making a great stir, as there unquestionably
would have been if night had beaten off bright day, and taken
possession of the world.  This was a great relief, because "three
days after sight of this First of Exchange pay to Mr. Ebenezer
Scrooge or his order," and so forth, would have become a mere United
States security if there were no days to count by.

Scrooge went to bed again, and thought, and thought, and thought it
over and over and over, and could make nothing of it.  The more he
thought, the more perplexed he was; and the more he endeavored not to
think, the more he thought.  Marley's Ghost bothered him exceedingly.
Every time he resolved within himself, after mature inquiry, that it
was all a dream, his mind flew back again, like a strong spring
released, to its first position, and presented the same problem to be
worked all through, "Was it a dream or not?"

Scrooge lay in this state until the chimes had gone three-quarters
more, when he remembered, on a sudden, that the Ghost had warned him
of a visitation when the bell tolled one.  He resolved to lie awake
until the hour was passed; and, considering that he could no more go
to sleep than go to Heaven, this was perhaps the wisest resolution in
his power.

The quarter was so long that he was more than once convinced he must
have sunk into a doze unconsciously, and missed the clock.  At length
it broke upon his listening ear.

"Ding, dong!"

"A quarter past," said Scrooge, counting.

"Ding, dong!"

"Half-past!" said Scrooge.

"Ding, dong!"

"A quarter to it," said Scrooge.

"Ding, dong!"

"The hour itself," said Scrooge, triumphantly, "and nothing else!"

He spoke before the hour bell sounded, which it now did with a deep,
dull, hollow, melancholy One.  Light flashed up in the room upon the
instant, and the curtains of his bed were drawn.

The curtains of his bed were drawn aside, I tell you, by a hand.  Not
the curtains at his feet, nor the curtains at his back, but those to
which his face was addressed.  The curtains of his bed were drawn
aside; and Scrooge, starting up into a half-recumbent attitude, found
himself face to face with the unearthly visitor who drew them: as
close to it as I am now to you, and I am standing in the spirit at
your elbow.

It was a strange figure--like a child: yet not so like a child as
like an old man, viewed through some supernatural medium, which gave
him the appearance of having receded from the view, and being
diminished to a child's proportions.  Its hair, which hung about its
neck and down its back, was white as if with age; and yet the face
had not a wrinkle in it, and the tenderest bloom was on the skin.
The arms were very long and muscular; the hands the same, as if its
hold were of uncommon strength.  Its legs and feet, most delicately
formed, were, like those upper members, bare.  It wore a tunic of the
purest white; and round its waist was bound a lustrous belt, the
sheen of which was beautiful.  It held a branch of fresh green holly
in its hand; and, in singular contradiction of that wintry emblem,
had its dress trimmed with summer flowers.  But the strangest thing
about it was, that from the crown of its head there sprang a bright
clear jet of light, by which all this was visible; and which was
doubtless the occasion of its using, in its duller moments, a great
extinguisher for a cap, which it now held under its arm.

Even this, though, when Scrooge looked at it with increasing
steadiness, was not its strangest quality.  For as its belt sparkled
and glittered now in one part and now in another, and what was light
one instant, at another time was dark, so the figure itself
fluctuated in its distinctness: being now a thing with one arm, now
with one leg, now with twenty legs, now a pair of legs without a
head, now a head without a body: of which dissolving parts, no
outline would be visible in the dense gloom wherein they melted away.
And in the very wonder of this, it would be itself again; distinct
and clear as ever.

"Are you the Spirit, sir, whose coming was foretold to me?" asked
Scrooge.

"I am!"

The voice was soft and gentle.  Singularly low, as if instead of
being so close beside him, it were at a distance.

"Who, and what are you?" Scrooge demanded.

"I am the Ghost of Christmas Past."

"Long past?" inquired Scrooge: observant of its dwarfish stature.

"No.  Your Past."

Perhaps, Scrooge could not have told anybody why, if anybody could
have asked him; but he had a special desire to see the Spirit in his
cap; and begged him to be covered.

"What!" exclaimed the Ghost, "would you so soon put out, with worldly
hands, the light I give?  Is it not enough that you are one of those
whose passions made this cap, and force me through whole trains of
years to wear it low upon my brow?"

Scrooge reverently disclaimed all intention to offend, or any
knowledge of having wilfully "bonneted" the Spirit at any period of
his life.  He then made bold to inquire what business brought him
there.

"Your welfare!" said the Ghost.

Scrooge expressed himself much obliged, but could not help thinking
that a night of unbroken rest would have been more conducive to that
end.  The Spirit must have heard him thinking, for it said
immediately:

"Your reclamation, then.  Take heed!"

It put out its strong hand as it spoke, and clasped him gently by the
arm.

"Rise! and walk with me!"

It would have been in vain for Scrooge to plead that the weather and
the hour were not adapted to pedestrian purposes; that the bed was
warm, and the thermometer a long way below freezing; that he was clad
but lightly in his slippers, dressing-gown, and night-cap; and that
he had a cold upon him at that time.  The grasp, though gentle as a
woman's hand, was not to be resisted.  He rose: but finding that the
Spirit made toward the window, clasped its robe in supplication.

"I am a mortal," Scrooge remonstrated, "and liable to fall."

"_Bear_ but a touch of my hand _there_," said the Spirit, laying it
upon his heart, "and you shall be upheld in more than this!"

As the words were spoken, they passed through the wall, and stood
upon an open country road, with fields on either hand.  The city had
entirely vanished.  Not a vestige of it was to be seen.  The darkness
and the mist had vanished with it, for it was a clear, cold, winter
day, with snow upon the ground.

"Good Heaven!" said Scrooge, clasping his hands together, as he
looked about him.  "I was bred in this place.  I was a boy here!"

The Spirit gazed upon him mildly.  Its gentle touch, though it had
been light and instantaneous, appeared still present to the old man's
sense of feeling.  He was conscious of a thousand odors floating in
the air, each one connected with a thousand thoughts and hopes, and
joys, and cares long, long forgotten!

"Your lip is trembling," said the Ghost.  "And what is that upon your
cheek?"

Scrooge muttered, with an unusual catching in his voice, that it was
a pimple; and begged the Ghost to lead him where he would.

"You recollect the way?" inquired the Spirit.

"Remember it!" cried Scrooge with fervor--"I could walk it blindfold."

"Strange to have forgotten it for so many years!" observed the Ghost.
"Let us go on."

They walked along the road: Scrooge recognizing every gate, and post,
and tree; until a little market town appeared in the distance, with
its bridge, its church, and winding river.  Some shaggy ponies now
were seen trotting toward them with boys upon their backs, who called
to other boys in country gigs and carts, driven by farmers.  All
these boys were in great spirits, and shouted to each other, until
the broad fields were so full of merry music that the crisp air
laughed to hear it.

"These are but shadows of the things that have been," said the Ghost.
"They have no consciousness of us."

The jocund travelers came on; and as they came, Scrooge knew and
named them every one.  Why was he rejoiced beyond all bounds to see
them!  Why did his cold eye glisten, and his heart leap up as they
went past!  Why was he filled with gladness when he heard them give
each other Merry Christmas, as they parted at cross-roads and
by-ways, for their several homes!  What was merry Christmas to
Scrooge?  Out upon merry Christmas!  What good had it ever done to
him?

"The school is not quite deserted," said the Ghost.  "A solitary
child, neglected by his friends, is left there still."

Scrooge said he knew it.  And he sobbed.

They left the highroad, by a well-remembered lane, and soon
approached a mansion of dull red brick, with a little weathercock
surmounted cupola, on the roof, and a bell hanging in it.  It was a
large house, but one of broken fortunes; for the spacious offices
were little used, their walls were damp and mossy, their windows
broken, and their gates decayed.  Fowls clucked and strutted in the
stables; and the coach-houses and sheds were overrun with grass.  Nor
was it more retentive of its ancient state, within; for entering the
dreary hall, and glancing through the open doors of many rooms, they
found them poorly furnished, cold, and vast.  There was an earthy
savor in the air, a chilly bareness in the place, which associated
itself somehow with too much getting up by candle-light, and not too
much to eat.

They went, the Ghost and Scrooge, across the hall, to a door at the
back of the house.  It opened before them, and disclosed a long,
bare, melancholy room, made barer still by lines of plain deal forms
and desks.  At one of these a lonely boy was reading near a feeble
fire; and Scrooge sat down upon a form, and wept to see his poor
forgotten self as he had used to be.

Not a latent echo in the house, not a squeak and scuffle from the
mice behind the paneling, not a drip from the half-thawed water-spout
in the dull yard behind, not a sigh among the leafless boughs of one
despondent poplar, not the idle swinging of an empty storehouse door,
no, not a clicking in the fire, but fell upon the heart of Scrooge
with softening influence, and gave a freer passage to his tears.

The Spirit touched him on the arm, and pointed to his younger self,
intent upon his reading.  Suddenly a man, in foreign garments:
wonderfully real and distinct to look at: stood outside the window,
with an axe stuck in his belt, and leading an ass laden with wood by
the bridle.

"Why, it's Ali Baba!" Scrooge exclaimed in ecstasy.  "It's dear old
honest Ali Baba!  Yes, yes, I know!  One Christmas time, when yonder
solitary child was left here all alone, he _did_ come, for the first
time, just like that.  Poor boy!  And Valentine," said Scrooge, "and
his wild brother, Orson; there they go!  And what's his name, who was
put down in his drawers, asleep, at the Gate of Damascus; don't you
see him!  And the Sultan's Groom turned upside down by the Genii;
there he is upon his head!  Serve him right.  I'm glad of it.  What
business had he to be married to the Princess!"

To hear Scrooge expending all the earnestness of his nature on such
subjects, in a most extraordinary voice between laughing and crying;
and to see his heightened and excited face; would have been a
surprise to his business friends in the City, indeed.

"There's the Parrot!" cried Scrooge.  "Green body and yellow tail,
with a thing like a lettuce growing out of the top of his head; there
he is!  Poor Robin Crusoe, he called him, when he came home again
after sailing round the island.  'Poor Robin Crusoe, where have you
been, Robin Crusoe?'  The man thought he was dreaming, but he wasn't.
It was the Parrot, you know.  There goes Friday, running for his life
to the little creek!  Halloa!  Hoop!  Halloo!"

Then, with a rapidity of transition very foreign to his usual
character, he said, in pity for his former self, "Poor boy!" and
cried again.

"I wish," Scrooge muttered, putting his hand in his pocket, and
looking about him, after drying his eyes with his cuff: "but it's too
late now."

"What is the matter?" asked the Spirit.

"Nothing," said Scrooge.  "Nothing.  There was a boy singing a
Christmas Carol at my door last night.  I should like to have given
him something: that's all."

The Ghost smiled thoughtfully, and waved its hand: saying as it did
so, "Let us see another Christmas!"

Scrooge's former self grew larger at the words, and the room became a
little darker and more dirty.  The panels shrank, the windows
cracked; fragments of plaster fell out of the ceiling, and the naked
laths were shown instead; but how all this was brought about Scrooge
knew no more than you do.  He only knew that it was quite correct;
that everything had happened so; that there he was, alone again, when
all the other boys had gone home for the jolly holidays.

He was not reading now, but walking up and down despairingly.
Scrooge looked at the Ghost, and with a mournful shaking of his head
glanced anxiously toward the door.

It opened; and a little girl, much younger than the boy, came darting
in, and putting her arms about his neck, and often kissing him,
addressed him as her "Dear, dear brother."

"I have come to bring you home, dear brother!" said the child,
clapping her tiny hands, and bending down to laugh.  "To bring you
home, home, home!"

"Home, little Fan?" returned the boy.

"Yes!" said the child, brimful of glee.  "Home, for good and all.
Home, forever and ever.  Father is so much kinder than he used to be
that home's like Heaven!  He spoke so gently to me one dear night
when I was going to bed, that I was not afraid to ask him once more
if you might come home; and he said Yes, you should; and sent me in a
coach to bring you.  And you're to be a man!" said the child, opening
her eyes, "and are never to come back here; but first we're to be
together all the Christmas long, and have the merriest time in all
the world."

"You are quite a woman, little Fan!" exclaimed the boy.  She clapped
her hands and laughed, and tried to touch his head; but being too
little, laughed again, and stood on tiptoe to embrace him.  Then she
began to drag him, in her childish eagerness, toward the door; and
he, nothing loth to go, accompanied her.

A terrible voice in the hall cried, "Bring down Master Scrooge's box,
there!" and in the hall appeared the schoolmaster himself, who glared
on Master Scrooge with a ferocious condescension, and threw him into
a dreadful state of mind by shaking hands with him.  He then conveyed
him and his sister into the veriest old well of a shivering
best-parlor that ever was seen, where the maps upon the wall, and the
celestial and terrestrial globes in the windows, were waxy with cold.
Here he produced a decanter of curiously light wine, and a block of
curiously heavy cake, and administered instalments of those dainties
to the young people; at the same time sending out a meagre servant to
offer a glass of "something" to the postboy, who answered that he
thanked the gentleman, but if it was the same tap as he had tasted
before, he had rather not.  Master Scrooge's trunk being by this time
tied on to the top of the chaise, the children bade the schoolmaster
good-by right willingly; and getting into it, drove gaily down the
garden-sweep, the quick wheels dashing the hoar-frost and snow from
off the dark leaves of the evergreens like spray.

"Always a delicate creature, whom a breath might have withered," said
the Ghost.  "But she had a large heart!"

"So she had," cried Scrooge.  "You're right.  I'll not gainsay it,
Spirit.  God forbid!"

"She died a woman," said the Ghost, "and had, as I think, children."

"One child," Scrooge returned.

"True," said the Ghost.  "Your nephew!"

Scrooge seemed uneasy in his mind; and answered briefly, "Yes."

Although they had but that moment left the school behind them, they
were now in the busy thoroughfares of a city, where shadowy
passengers passed and repassed; where shadowy carts and coaches
battled for the way, and all the strife and tumult of a real city
were.  It was made plain enough, by the dressing of the shops, that
here too it was Christmas time again; but it was evening, and the
streets were lighted up.

The Ghost stopped at a certain warehouse door, and asked Scrooge if
he knew it.

"Know it!" said Scrooge.  "I was apprenticed here!"

They went in.  At sight of an old gentleman in a Welsh wig, sitting
behind such a high desk, that if he had been two inches taller he
must have knocked his head against the ceiling, Scrooge cried in
great excitement:

"Why, it's old Fezziwig!  Bless his heart; it's Fezziwig alive again!"

Old Fezziwig laid down his pen, and looked up at the clock, which
pointed to the hour of seven.  He rubbed his hands; adjusted his
capacious waistcoat; laughed all over himself, from his shoes to his
organ of benevolence; and called out in a comfortable, oily, rich,
fat, jovial voice:

"Yo ho, there!  Ebenezer!  Dick!"

Scrooge's former self, now grown a young man, came briskly in,
accompanied by his fellow-'prentice.

"Dick Wilkins, to be sure!" said Scrooge to the Ghost.  "Bless me,
yes.  There he is.  He was very much attached to me, was Dick.  Poor
Dick!  Dear, dear!"

"Yo ho, my boys!" said Fezziwig.  "No more work to-night.  Christmas
Eve, Dick.  Christmas, Ebenezer!  Let's have the shutters up," cried
old Fezziwig, with a sharp clap of his hands, "before a man can say
Jack Robinson!"

You wouldn't believe how those two fellows went at it!  They charged
into the street with the shutters--one, two, three--had 'em up in
their places--four, five, six--barred 'em and pinned 'em--seven,
eight, nine--and came back before you could have got to twelve,
panting like racehorses.

"Hilli-ho!" cried old Fezziwig, skipping down from the high desk with
wonderful agility.  "Clear away, my lads, and let's have lots of room
here!  Hilli-ho, Dick!  Chirrup, Ebenezer!"

Clear away!  There was nothing they wouldn't have cleared away, or
couldn't have cleared away, with old Fezziwig looking on.  It was
done in a minute.  Every movable was packed off, as if it were
dismissed from public life for evermore; the floor was swept and
watered, the lamps were trimmed, fuel was heaped upon the fire; and
the warehouse was as snug, and warm, and dry, and bright a ballroom
as you would desire to see upon a winter's night.

In came a fiddler with a music-book, and went up to the lofty desk,
and made an orchestra of it, and tuned like fifty stomach-aches.  In
came Mrs. Fezziwig, one vast substantial smile.  In came the three
Miss Fezziwigs, beaming and lovable.  In came the six young followers
whose hearts they broke.  In came all the young men and women
employed in the business.  In came the housemaid, with her cousin,
the baker.  In came the cook, with her brother's particular friend,
the milkman.  In came the boy from over the way, who was suspected of
not having board enough from his master; trying to hide himself
behind the girl from next door but one, who was proved to have had
her ears pulled by her mistress.  In they all came, one after
another; some shyly, some boldly, some gracefully, some awkwardly,
some pushing, some pulling; in they all came, anyhow and everyhow.
Away they all went, twenty couple at once, hands half round and back
again the other way; down the middle and up again; round and round in
various stages of affectionate grouping; old top couple always
turning up in the wrong place; new top couple starting off again, as
soon as they got there; all top couples at last, and not a bottom one
to help them.  When this result was brought about, old Fezziwig,
clapping his hands to stop the dance, cried out, "Well done!" and the
fiddler plunged his hot face into a pot of porter, especially
provided for that purpose.  But scorning rest upon his reappearance,
he instantly began again, though there were no dancers yet, as if the
other fiddler had been carried home, exhausted, on a shutter; and he
were a bran-new man resolved to beat him out of sight, or perish.

There were more dances, and there were forfeits, and more dances, and
there was cake, and there was negus, and there was a great piece of
Cold Roast, and there was a great piece of Cold Boiled, and there
were mince-pies, and plenty of beer.  But the great effect of the
evening came after the Roast and Boiled when the fiddler (an artful
dog, mind!  The sort of man who knew his business better than you or
I could have told it him!) struck up "Sir Roger de Coverley."  Then
old Fezziwig stood out to dance with Mrs. Fezziwig.  Top couple, too;
with a good stiff piece of work cut out for them; three or four and
twenty pair of partners; people who were not to be trifled with;
people who would dance, and had no notion of walking.

But if they had been twice as many: ah, four times: old Fezziwig
would have been a match for them, and so would Mrs. Fezziwig.  As to
_her_, she was worthy to be his partner in every sense of the term.
If that's not high praise, tell me higher, and I'll use it.  A
positive light appeared to issue from Fezziwig's calves.  They shone
in every part of the dance like moons.  You couldn't have predicted,
at any given time, what would become of 'em next.  And when old
Fezziwig and Mrs. Fezziwig had gone all through the dance; advance
and retire, hold hands with your partner; bow and courtesy;
cork-screw; thread-the-needle, and back again to your place; Fezziwig
"cut"--cut so deftly, that he appeared to wink with his legs, and
came upon his feet again without a stagger.

When the clock struck eleven, this domestic ball broke up.  Mr. and
Mrs. Fezziwig took their stations, one on either side the door, and
shaking hands with every person individually as he or she went out,
wished him or her a Merry Christmas.  When everybody had retired but
the two 'prentices, they did the same to them; and thus the cheerful
voices died away, and the lads were left to their beds; which were
under a counter in the back-shop.

During the whole of this time, Scrooge had acted like a man out of
his wits.  His heart and soul were in the scene, and with his former
self.  He corroborated everything, remembered everything, enjoyed
everything, and underwent the strangest agitation.  It was not until
now, when the bright faces of his former self and Dick were turned
from them, that he remembered the Ghost, and became conscious that it
was looking full upon him, while the light upon its head burned very
clear.

"A small matter," said the Ghost, "to make these silly folks so full
of gratitude."

"Small!" echoed Scrooge.

The Spirit signed to him to listen to the two apprentices, who were
pouring out their hearts in praise of Fezziwig: and when he had done
so, said:

"Why!  Is it not?  He has spent but a few pounds of your mortal
money: three or four, perhaps.  Is that so much that he deserves this
praise?"

"It isn't that," said Scrooge, heated by the remark, and speaking
unconsciously like his former, not his latter, self.  "It isn't that,
Spirit.  He has the power to render us happy or unhappy; to make our
service light or burdensome; a pleasure or a toil.  Say that his
power lies in words and looks; in things so slight and insignificant
that it is impossible to add and count 'em up: what then?  The
happiness he gives is quite as great as if it cost a fortune."

He felt the Spirit's glance, and stopped.

"What is the matter?" asked the Ghost.

"Nothing particular," said Scrooge.

"Something, I think?" the Ghost insisted.

"No," said Scrooge, "no.  I should like to be able to say a word or
two to my clerk just now!  That's all."

His former self turned down the lamps as he gave utterance to the
wish; and Scrooge and the Ghost again stood side by side in the open
air.

"My time grows short," observed the Spirit.  "Quick!"

This was not addressed to Scrooge, or to any one whom he could see,
but it produced an immediate effect.  For again Scrooge saw himself.
He was older now; a man in the prime of life.  His face had not the
harsh and rigid lines of later years; but it had begun to wear the
signs of care and avarice.  There was an eager, greedy, restless
motion in the eye, which showed the passion that had taken root, and
where the shadow of the growing tree would fall.

He was not alone, but sat by the side of a fair young girl in a
mourning-dress: in whose eyes there were tears, which sparkled in the
light that shone out of the Ghost of Christmas Past.

"It matters little," she said, softly.  "To you, very little.
Another idol has displaced me; and if it can cheer and comfort you in
time to come, as I would have tried to do, I have no just cause to
grieve."

"What Idol has displaced you?" he rejoined.

"A golden one."

"This is the even-handed dealing of the world!" he said.  "There is
nothing on which it is so hard as poverty; and there is nothing it
professes to condemn with such severity as the pursuit of wealth!"

"You fear the world too much," she answered, gently.  "All your other
hopes have merged into the hope of being beyond the chance of its
sordid reproach.  I have seen your nobler aspirations fall off one by
one, until the master-passion, Gain, engrosses you.  Have I not?"

"What then?" he retorted.  "Even if I have grown so much wiser, what
then?  I am not changed toward you."

She shook her head.

"Am I?"

"Our contract is an old one.  It was made when we were both poor and
content to be so, until, in good season, we could improve our worldly
fortune by our patient industry.  You _are_ changed.  When it was
made, you were another man."

"I was a boy," he said impatiently.

"Your own feeling tells you that you were not what you are," she
returned.  "I am.  That which promised happiness when we were one in
heart, is fraught with misery now that we are two.  How often and how
keenly I have thought of this, I will not say.  It is enough that I
_have_ thought of it, and can release you."

"Have I ever sought release?"

"In words?  No.  Never."

"In what, then?"

"In a changed nature; in an altered spirit; in another atmosphere of
life; another Hope as its great end.  In everything that made my love
of any worth or value in your sight.  If this had never been between
us," said the girl, looking mildly, but with steadiness, upon him,
"tell me, would you seek me out and try to win me now?  Ah, no!"

He seemed to yield to the justice of this supposition, in spite of
himself.  But he said with a struggle, "You think not."

"I would gladly think otherwise if I could," she answered, "Heaven
knows!  When _I_ have learned a Truth like this, I know how strong
and irresistible it must be.  But if you were free to-day, to-morrow,
yesterday, can even I believe that you would choose a dowerless
girl--you who, in your very confidence with her, weigh everything by
Gain: or, choosing her, if for a moment you were false enough to your
one guiding principle to do so, do I not know that your repentance
and regret would surely follow?  I do; and I release you.  With a
full heart, for the love of him you once were."

He was about to speak; but with her head turned from him, she resumed.

"You may--the memory of what is past half makes me hope you
will--have pain in this.  A very, very brief time, and you will
dismiss the recollection of it, gladly, as an unprofitable dream,
from which it happened well that you awoke.  May you be happy in the
life you have chosen!"

She left him, and they parted.

"Spirit!" said Scrooge, "show me no more!  Conduct me home.  Why do
you delight to torture me?"

"One shadow more!" exclaimed the Ghost.

"No more!" cried Scrooge.  "No more.  I don't wish to see it.  Show
me no more!"

But the relentless Ghost pinioned him in both his arms, and forced
him to observe what happened next.

They were in another scene and place; a room not very large or
handsome, but full of comfort.  Near to the winter fire sat a
beautiful young girl, so like the last that Scrooge believed it was
the same, until he saw her, now a comely matron, sitting opposite her
daughter.  The noise in this room was perfectly tumultuous, for there
were more children there than Scrooge in his agitated state of mind
could count; and, unlike the celebrated herd in the poem, they were
not forty children conducting themselves like one, but every child
was conducting itself like forty.  The consequences were uproarious
beyond belief; but no one seemed to care; on the contrary, the mother
and daughter laughed heartily, and enjoyed it very much; and the
latter, soon beginning to mingle in the sports, got pillaged by the
young brigands most ruthlessly.  What would I not have given to be
one of them!  Though I never could have been so rude, no, no!  I
wouldn't for the wealth of all the world have crushed that braided
hair, and torn it down; and for the precious little shoe, I wouldn't
have plucked it off, God bless my soul! to save my life.  As to
measuring her waist in sport, as they did, bold young brood, I
couldn't have done it; I should have expected my arm to have grown
round it for a punishment, and never come straight again.  And yet I
should have dearly liked, I own, to have touched her lips; to have
questioned her, that she might have opened them; to have looked upon
the lashes of her downcast eyes, and never raised a blush; to have
let loose waves of hair, an inch of which would be a keepsake beyond
price: in short, I should have liked, I do confess, to have had the
lightest license of a child, and yet been man enough to know its
value.

But now a knocking at the door was heard, and such a rush immediately
ensued that she with laughing face and plundered dress was borne
toward it the centre of a flushed and boisterous group, just in time
to greet the father, who came home attended by a man laden with
Christmas toys and presents.  Then the shouting and the struggling,
and the onslaught that was made on the defenseless porter!  The
scaling him with chairs for ladders to dive into his pockets, despoil
him of brown-paper parcels, hold on tight by his cravat, hug him
round the neck, pommel his back, and kick his legs in irrepressible
affection!  The shouts of wonder and delight with which the
development of every package was received!  The terrible announcement
that the baby had been taken in the act of putting a doll's
frying-pan into his mouth, and was more than suspected of having
swallowed a fictitious turkey, glued on a wooden platter!  The
immense relief of finding this a false alarm!  The joy, and
gratitude, and ecstasy!  They are all indescribable alike.  It is
enough that by degrees the children and their emotions got out of the
parlor and by one stair at a time, up to the top of the house; where
they went to bed, and so subsided.

And now Scrooge looked on more attentively than ever, when the master
of the house, having his daughter leaning fondly on him, sat down
with her and her mother at his own fireside; and when he thought that
such another creature, quite as graceful and as full of promise,
might have called him father, and been a spring-time in the haggard
winter of his life, his sight grew very dim indeed.

"Belle," said the husband, turning to his wife with a smile, "I saw
an old friend of yours this afternoon."

"Who was it?"

"Guess!"

"How can I?  Tut, don't I know?" she added in the same breath,
laughing as he laughed.  "Mr. Scrooge."

"Mr. Scrooge it was.  I passed his office window; and as it was not
shut up, and he had a candle inside, I could scarcely help seeing
him.  His partner lies upon the point of death, I hear; and there he
sat alone.  Quite alone in the world, I do believe."

"Spirit!" said Scrooge in a broken voice, "remove me from this place."

"I told you these were shadows of the things that have been," said
the Ghost.  "That they are what they are, do not blame me!"

"Remove me!" Scrooge exclaimed, "I can not bear it!"

He turned upon the Ghost, and seeing that it looked upon him with a
face, in which in some strange way there were fragments of all the
faces it had shown him, wrestled with it.

"Leave me!  Take me back.  Haunt me no longer!"

In the struggle, if that can be called a struggle in which the Ghost
with no visible resistance on its own part was undisturbed by any
effort of its adversary, Scrooge observed that its light was burning
high and bright; and dimly connecting that with its influence over
him, he seized the extinguisher-cap, and by a sudden action pressed
it down upon its head.

The Spirit dropped beneath it, so that the extinguisher covered its
whole form; but though Scrooge pressed it down with all his force, he
could not hide the light, which streamed from under it, in an
unbroken flood upon the ground.

He was conscious of being exhausted, and overcome by an irresistible
drowsiness; and, further, of being in his own bedroom.  He gave the
cap a parting squeeze, in which his hand relaxed; and had barely time
to reel to bed, before he sank into a heavy sleep.



STAVE THREE

_The Second of the Three Spirits_

Awakening in the middle of a prodigiously tough snore and sitting up
in bed to get his thoughts together, Scrooge had no occasion to be
told that the bell was again upon the stroke of One.  He felt that he
was restored to consciousness in the right nick of time, for the
especial purpose of holding a conference with the second messenger
despatched to him through Jacob Marley's intervention.  But, finding
that he turned uncomfortably cold when he began to wonder which of
his curtains this new spectre would draw back, he put them every one
aside with his own hands, and lying down again, established a sharp
look-out all round the bed.  For he wished to challenge the Spirit on
the moment of its appearance, and did not wish to be taken by
surprise and made nervous.

Gentlemen of the free-and-easy sort, who plume themselves on being
acquainted with a move or two, and being usually equal to the
time-of-day, express the wide range of their capacity for adventure
by observing that they are good for anything from pitch-and-toss to
manslaughter; between which opposite extremes, no doubt, there lies a
tolerably wide and comprehensive range of subjects.  Without
venturing for Scrooge quite as hardily as this, I don't mind calling
on you to believe that he was ready for a good broad field of strange
appearances, and that nothing between a baby and a rhinoceros would
have astonished him very much.

Now, being prepared for almost anything, he was not by any means
prepared for nothing; and, consequently, when the Bell struck One,
and no shape appeared, he was taken with a violent fit of trembling.
Five minutes, ten minutes, a quarter of an hour went by, yet nothing
came.  All this time he lay upon his bed, the very core and centre of
a blaze of ruddy light, which streamed upon it when the clock
proclaimed the hour; and which, being only light, was more alarming
than a dozen ghosts, as he was powerless to make out what it meant,
or would be at; and was sometimes apprehensive that he might be at
that very moment an interesting case of spontaneous combustion,
without having the consolation of knowing it.  At last, however, he
began to think--as you or I would have thought at first; for it is
always the person not in the predicament who knows what ought to have
been done in it, and would unquestionably have done it too--at last,
I say, he began to think that the source and secret of this ghostly
light might be in the adjoining room, from whence, on further tracing
it, it seemed to shine.  This idea taking full possession of his
mind, he got up softly and shuffled in his slippers to the door.

The moment Scrooge's hand was on the lock, a strange voice called him
by his name, and bade him enter.  He obeyed.

It was his own room.  There was no doubt about that.  But it had
undergone a surprising transformation.  The walls and ceiling were so
hung with living green, that it looked a perfect grove, from every
part of which bright gleaming berries glistened.  The crisp leaves of
holly, mistletoe, and ivy reflected back the light, as if so many
little mirrors had been scattered there; and such a mighty blaze went
roaring up the chimney as that dull petrifaction of a hearth had
never known in Scrooge's time, or Marley's, or for many and many a
winter season gone.  Heaped up on the floor, to form a kind of
throne, were turkeys, geese, game, poultry, brawn, great joints of
meat, sucking-pigs, long wreaths of sausages, mince-pies,
plum-puddings, barrels of oysters, red-hot chestnuts, cherry-cheeked
apples, juicy oranges, luscious pears, immense twelfth-cakes, and
seething bowls of punch, that made the chamber dim with their
delicious steam.  In easy state upon this couch, there sat a jolly
Giant, glorious to see; who bore a glowing torch, in shape not unlike
Plenty's horn, and held it up, high up, to shed its light on Scrooge,
as he came peeping round the door.

"Come in!" exclaimed the Ghost.  "Come in! and know me better, man!"

Scrooge entered timidly, and hung his head before this Spirit.  He
was not the dogged Scrooge he had been; and though the Spirit's eyes
were clear and kind, he did not like to meet them.

"I am the Ghost of Christmas Present," said the Spirit.  "Look upon
me!"

Scrooge reverently did so.  It was clothed in one simple deep-green
robe, or mantle, bordered with white fur.  This garment hung so
loosely on the figure, that its capacious breast was bare, as if
disdaining to be warded or concealed by any artifice.  Its feet,
observable beneath the ample folds of the garment, were also bare;
and on its head it wore no other covering than a holly wreath set
here and there with shining icicles.  Its dark-brown curls were long
and free; free as its genial face, its sparkling eye, its open hand,
its cheery voice, its unconstrained demeanor, and its joyful air.
Girdled round its middle was an antique scabbard; but no sword was in
it, and the ancient sheath was eaten up with rust.

"You have never seen the like of me before!" exclaimed the Spirit.

"Never," Scrooge made answer to it.

"Have never walked forth with the younger members of my family;
meaning (for I am very young) my elder brothers born in these later
years?" pursued the Phantom.

"I don't think I have," said Scrooge.  "I am afraid I have not.  Have
you had many brothers, Spirit?"

"More than eighteen hundred," said the Ghost.

"A tremendous family to provide for!" muttered Scrooge.

The Ghost of Christmas Present rose.

"Spirit," said Scrooge submissively, "conduct me where you will.  I
went forth last night on compulsion, and I learned a lesson which is
working now.  To-night, if you have aught to teach me, let me profit
by it."

"Touch my robe!"

Scrooge did as he was told, and held it fast.

Holly, mistletoe, red berries, ivy, turkeys, geese, game, poultry,
brawn, meat, pigs, sausages, oysters, pies, puddings, fruit, and
punch, all vanished instantly.  So did the room, the fire, the ruddy
glow, the hour of night, and they stood in the City streets on
Christmas morning, where (for the weather was severe) the people made
a rough but brisk and not unpleasant kind of music, in scraping the
snow from the pavement in front of their dwellings, and from the tops
of their houses: whence it was mad delight to the boys to see it come
plumping down into the road below, and splitting into artificial
little snowstorms.

The house fronts looked black enough, and the windows blacker,
contrasting with the smooth white sheet of snow upon the roofs, and
with the dirtier snow upon the ground; which last deposit had been
plowed up in deep furrows by the heavy wheels of carts and wagons;
furrows that crossed and recrossed each other hundreds of times where
the great streets branched off, and made intricate channels, hard to
trace, in the thick yellow mud and icy water.  The sky was gloomy,
and the shortest streets were choked up with a dingy mist, half
thawed, half frozen, whose heavier particles descended in a shower of
sooty atoms, as if all the chimneys in Great Britain had, by one
consent, caught fire, and were blazing away to their dear hearts'
content.  There was nothing very cheerful in the climate or the town,
and yet was there an air of cheerfulness abroad that the clearest
summer air and brightest summer sun might have endeavored to diffuse
in vain.

For the people who were shoveling away on the housetops were jovial
and full of glee; calling out to one another from the parapets, and
now and then exchanging a facetious snowball--better-natured missile
far than many a wordy jest--laughing heartily if it went right and
not less heartily if it went wrong.  The poulterers' shops were still
half open, and the fruiterers were radiant in their glory.  There
were great, round, pot-bellied baskets of chestnuts, shaped like the
waistcoats of jolly old gentlemen, lolling at the doors, and tumbling
out into the street in their apoplectic opulence.  There were ruddy,
brown-faced, broad-girthed Spanish Onions, shining in the fatness of
their growth like Spanish Friars; and winking from their shelves in
wanton slyness at the girls as they went by and glanced demurely at
the hung-up mistletoe.  There were pears and apples, clustered high
in blooming pyramids; there were bunches of grapes, made, in the
shopkeepers' benevolence, to dangle from conspicuous hooks, that
people's mouths might water gratis as they passed; there were piles
of filberts, mossy and brown, recalling, in their fragrance, ancient
walks among the woods, and pleasant shufflings ankle-deep through
withered leaves; there were Norfolk Biffins, squab and swarthy,
setting off the yellow of the oranges and lemons, and, in the great
compactness of their juicy persons, urgently entreating and
beseeching to be carried home in paper bags and eaten after dinner.
The very gold and silver fish, set forth among these choice fruits in
a bowl, though members of a dull and stagnant-blooded race, appeared
to know that there was something going on; and, to a fish, went
gasping round and round their little world in slow and passionless
excitement.

The Grocers'! oh the Grocers'! nearly closed, with perhaps two
shutters down, or one; but through those gaps such glimpses!  It was
not alone that the scales descending on the counter made a merry
sound, or that the twine and roller parted company so briskly, or
that the canisters were rattled up and down like juggling tricks, or
even that the blended scents of tea and coffee were so grateful to
the nose, or even that the raisins were so plentiful and rare, the
almonds so extremely white, the sticks of cinnamon so long and
straight, the other spices so delicious, the candied fruits so caked
and spotted with molten sugar as to make the coldest lookers-on feel
faint and subsequently bilious.  Nor was it that the figs were moist
and pulpy, or that the French plums blushed in modest tartness from
their highly decorated boxes, or that everything was good to eat and
in its Christmas dress: but the customers were all so hurried and so
eager in the hopeful promise of the day, that they tumbled up against
each other at the door, clashing their wicker baskets wildly, and
left their purchases upon the counter, and came running back to fetch
them, and committed hundreds of the like mistakes in the best humor
possible; while the Grocer and his people were so frank and fresh
that the polished hearts with which they fastened their aprons behind
might have been their own, worn outside for general inspection, and
for Christmas daws to peck at if they chose.

But soon the steeples called good people all to church and chapel,
and away they came, flocking through the streets in their best
clothes, and with their gayest faces.  And at the same time there
emerged from scores of by-streets, lanes, and nameless turnings,
innumerable people, carrying their dinners to the bakers' shops.  The
sight of these poor revelers appeared to interest the Spirit very
much, for he stood with Scrooge beside him in a baker's doorway, and
taking off the covers as their bearers passed, sprinkled incense on
their dinners from his torch.  And it was a very uncommon kind of
torch, for once or twice when there were angry words between some
dinner-carriers who had jostled with each other, he shed a few drops
of water on them from it, and their good humor was restored directly.
For they said it was a shame to quarrel upon Christmas Day.  And so
it was!  God love it, so it was!

In time the bells ceased, and the bakers were shut up; and yet there
was a genial shadowing forth of all these dinners and the progress of
their cooking, in the thawed blotch of wet above each baker's oven;
where the pavement smoked as if its stones were cooking too.

"Is there a peculiar flavor in what you sprinkle from your torch?"
asked Scrooge.

"There is.  My own."

"Would it apply to any kind of dinner on this day?" asked Scrooge.

"To any kindly given.  To a poor one most."

"Why to a poor one most?" asked Scrooge.

"Because it needs it most."

"Spirit," said Scrooge, after a moment's thought, "I wonder you, of
all the beings in the many worlds about us, should desire to cramp
these people's opportunities of innocent enjoyment."

"I!" cried the Spirit.

"You would deprive them of their means of dinner every seventh day,
often the only day on which they can be said to dine at all," said
Scrooge.  "Wouldn't you?"

"I!" cried the Spirit.

"You seek to close these places on the Seventh Day!" said Scrooge.
"And it comes to the same thing."

"_I_ seek!" exclaimed the Spirit.

"Forgive me if I am wrong.  It has been done in your name, or at
least in that of your family," said Scrooge.

"There are some upon this earth of yours," returned the Spirit, "who
lay claim to know us, and who do their deeds of passion, pride,
ill-will, hatred, envy, bigotry, and selfishness in our name, who are
as strange to us and all our kith and kin, as if they had never
lived.  Remember that, and charge their doings on themselves, not us."

Scrooge promised that he would; and they went on, invisible, as they
had been before, into the suburbs of the town.  It was a remarkable
quality of the Ghost (which Scrooge had observed at the baker's),
that notwithstanding his gigantic size, he could accommodate himself
to any place with ease; and that he stood beneath a low roof quite as
gracefully and like a supernatural creature as it was possible he
could have done in any lofty hall.

And perhaps it was the pleasure the good Spirit had in showing off
this power of his, or else it was his own kind, generous, hearty
nature, and his sympathy with all poor men, that led him straight to
Scrooge's clerk's; for there he went, and took Scrooge with him,
holding to his robe; and on the threshold of the door the Spirit
smiled, and stopped to bless Bob Cratchit's dwelling with the
sprinklings of his torch.  Think of that!  Bob had but fifteen "Bob"
a week himself; he pocketed on Saturdays but fifteen copies of his
Christian name; and yet the Ghost of Christmas Present blessed his
four-roomed house!

Then up rose Mrs. Cratchit, Cratchit's wife, dressed out but poorly
in a twice-turned gown, but brave in ribbons, which are cheap and
make a goodly show for sixpence; and she laid the cloth, assisted by
Belinda Cratchit, second of her daughters, also brave in ribbons;
while Master Peter Cratchit plunged a fork into the saucepan of
potatoes, and getting the corners of his monstrous shirt collar
(Bob's private property, conferred upon his son and heir in honor of
the day) into his mouth, rejoiced to find himself so gallantly
attired, and yearned to show his linen in the fashionable Parks.  And
now two smaller Cratchits, boy and girl, came tearing in, screaming
that outside the baker's they had smelled the goose, and known it for
their own; and basking in luxurious thoughts of sage-and-onion, these
young Cratchits danced about the table, and exalted Master Peter
Cratchit to the skies, while he (not proud, although his collars
nearly choked him) blew the fire, until the slow potatoes, bubbling
up, knocked loudly at the saucepan-lid to be let out and peeled.

"What has ever got your precious father, then?" said Mrs. Cratchit.
"And your brother, Tiny Tim!  And Martha warn't as late last
Christmas Day by half-an-hour!"

"Here's Martha, mother!" said a girl, appearing as she spoke.

"Here's Martha, mother!" cried the two young Cratchits.  "Hurrah!
There's _such_ a goose, Martha!"

"Why, bless your heart alive, my dear, how late you are!" said Mrs.
Cratchit, kissing her a dozen times, and taking off her shawl and
bonnet for her with officious zeal.

"We'd a deal of work to finish up last night," replied the girl, "and
had to clear away this morning, mother!"

"Well!  Never mind so long as you are come," said Mrs. Cratchit.
"Sit ye down before the fire, my dear, and have a warm, Lord bless
ye!"

"No, no!  There's father coming," cried the two young Cratchits, who
were everywhere at once.  "Hide, Martha, hide!"

So Martha hid herself, and in came little Bob, the father, with at
least three feet of comforter, exclusive of the fringe, hanging down
before him; and his threadbare clothes darned up and brushed, to look
seasonable; and Tiny Tim upon his shoulder.  Alas for Tiny Tim, he
bore a little crutch, and had his limbs supported by an iron frame!

"Why, where's our Martha?" cried Bob Cratchit, looking round.

"Not coming," said Mrs. Cratchit.

"Not coming!" said Bob, with a sudden declension in his high spirits;
for he had been Tim's blood horse all the way from church, and had
come home rampant.  "Not coming upon Christmas Day!"

Martha didn't like to see him disappointed, if it were only in joke;
so she came out prematurely from behind the closet door, and ran into
his arms, while the two young Cratchits hustled Tiny Tim, and bore
him off into the wash-house, that he might hear the pudding singing
in the copper.

"And how did little Tim behave?" asked Mrs. Cratchit, when she had
rallied Bob on his credulity, and Bob had hugged his daughter to his
heart's content.

"As good as gold," said Bob, "and better.  Somehow he gets
thoughtful, sitting by himself so much, and thinks the strangest
things you ever heard.  He told me, coming home, that he hoped the
people saw him in the church, because he was a cripple, and it might
be pleasant to them to remember upon Christmas Day, who made lame
beggars walk and blind men see."

Bob's voice was tremulous when he told them this, and trembled more
when he said that Tiny Tim was growing strong and hearty.

His active little crutch was heard upon the floor, and back came Tiny
Tim before another word was spoken, escorted by his brother and
sister to his stool before the fire; and while Bob, turning up his
cuffs--as if, poor fellow, they were capable of being made more
shabby--compounded some hot mixture in a jug with gin and lemons, and
stirred it round and round and put it on the hob to simmer; Master
Peter, and the two ubiquitous young Cratchits went to fetch the
goose, with which they soon returned in high procession.

Such a bustle ensued that you might have thought a goose the rarest
of all birds; a feathered phenomenon, to which a black swan was a
matter of course--and in truth it was something very like it in that
house.  Mrs. Cratchit made the gravy (ready beforehand in a little
saucepan) hissing hot; Master Peter mashed the potatoes with
incredible vigor; Miss Belinda sweetened up the apple-sauce; Martha
dusted the hot plates; Bob took Tiny Tim beside him in a tiny corner
at the table; the two young Cratchits set chairs for everybody, not
forgetting themselves, and mounting guard upon their posts, crammed
spoons into their mouths, lest they should shriek for goose before
their turn came to be helped.  At last the dishes were set on, and
grace was said.  It was succeeded by a breathless pause, as Mrs.
Cratchit, looking slowly all along the carving-knife, prepared to
plunge it in the breast; but when she did, and when the long expected
gush of stuffing issued forth, one murmur of delight arose all round
the board, and even Tiny Tim, excited by the two young Cratchits,
beat on the table with the handle of his knife, and feebly cried
Hurrah!

There never was such a goose.  Bob said he didn't believe there ever
was such a goose cooked.  Its tenderness and flavor, size and
cheapness, were the themes of universal admiration.  Eked out by the
apple sauce and mashed potatoes, it was a sufficient dinner for the
whole family; indeed, as Mrs. Cratchit said with great delight
(surveying one small atom of a bone upon the dish), they hadn't ate
it all at last!  Yet every one had had enough, and the younger
Cratchits in particular, were steeped in sage-and-onion to the
eyebrows!  But now, the plates being changed by Miss Belinda, Mrs.
Cratchit left the room alone--too nervous to bear witness--to take
the pudding up and bring it in.

Suppose it should not be done enough!  Suppose it should break in
turning out!  Suppose somebody should have got over the wall of the
back-yard, and stolen it, while they were merry with the goose--a
supposition at which the two young Cratchits became livid!  All sorts
of horrors were supposed.

Hallo!  A great deal of steam!  The pudding was out of the copper.  A
smell like a washing-day!  That was the cloth.  A smell like an
eating-house and a pastry-cook's next door to each other, with a
laundress's next door to that!  That was the pudding!  In half a
minute Mrs. Cratchit entered--flushed, but smiling proudly--with the
pudding, like a speckled cannon-ball, so hard and firm, blazing in
half of half-a-quartern of ignited brandy, and bedight with Christmas
holly stuck into the top.

Oh, a wonderful pudding! Bob Cratchit said, and calmly too, that he
regarded it as the greatest success achieved by Mrs. Cratchit since
their marriage.  Mrs. Cratchit said that now the weight was off her
mind, she would confess she had had her doubts about the quantity of
flour.  Everybody had something to say about it, but nobody said or
thought it was at all a small pudding for a large family.  It would
have been flat heresy to do so.  Any Cratchit would have blushed to
hint at such a thing.

At last the dinner was all done, the cloth was cleared, the hearth
swept, and the fire made up.  The compound in the jug being tasted,
and considered perfect, apples and oranges were put upon the table,
and a shovelful of chestnuts on the fire.  Then all the Cratchit
family drew round the hearth, in what Bob Cratchit called a circle,
meaning half a one; and at Bob Cratchit's elbows stood the family
display of glass.  Two tumblers, and a custard-cup without a handle.

These held the hot stuff from the jug, however, as well as golden
goblets would have done; and Bob served it out with beaming looks,
while the chestnuts on the fire sputtered and cracked noisily.  Then
Bob proposed:

"A Merry Christmas to us all, my dears.  God bless us!"

Which all the family reechoed.

"God bless us, every one!" said Tiny Tim, the last of all.

He sat very close to his father's side upon his little stool.  Bob
held his withered little hand in his, as if he loved the child, and
wished to keep him by his side, and dreaded that he might be taken
from him.

"Spirit," said Scrooge, with an interest he had never felt before,
"tell me if Tiny Tim will live."

"I see a vacant seat," replied the Ghost, "in the poor
chimney-corner, and a crutch without an owner, carefully preserved.
If these shadows remain unaltered by the future, the child will die."

"No, no," said Scrooge.  "Oh, no, kind Spirit! say he will be spared."

"If these shadows remain unaltered by the future, none other of my
race," returned the Ghost, "will find him here.  What then?  If he be
like to die, he had better do it, and decrease the surplus
population."

Scrooge hung his head to hear his own words quoted by the Spirit, and
was overcome with penitence and grief.

"Man," said the Ghost, "if man you be in heart, not adamant, forbear
that wicked cant until you have discovered What the surplus is, and
Where it is.  Will you decide what men shall live, what men shall
die?  It may be that in the sight of Heaven you are more worthless
and less fit to live than millions like this poor man's child.  Oh
God! to hear the Insect on the leaf pronouncing on the too much life
among his hungry brothers in the dust!"

Scrooge bent before the Ghost's rebuke, and trembling cast his eyes
upon the ground.  But he raised them speedily, on hearing his own
name.

"Mr. Scrooge!" said Bob; "I'll give you Mr. Scrooge, the Founder of
the Feast!"

"The Founder of the Feast indeed!" cried Mrs. Cratchit, reddening.
"I wish I had him here.  I'd give him a piece of my mind to feast
upon, and I hope he'd have a good appetite for it."

"My dear," said Bob, "the children!  Christmas Day."

"It should be Christmas Day, I am sure," said she, "on which one
drinks the health of such an odious, stingy, hard, unfeeling man as
Mr. Scrooge.  You know he is, Robert!  Nobody knows it better than
you do, poor fellow!"

"My dear," was Bob's mild answer, "Christmas Day."

"I'll drink his health for your sake and the Day's," said Mrs.
Cratchit, "not for his.  Long life to him!  A Merry Christmas and a
Happy New Year!  He'll be very merry and very happy, I have no doubt!"

The children drank the toast after her.  It was the first of their
proceedings which had no heartiness in it.  Tiny Tim drank it last of
all, but he didn't care twopence for it.  Scrooge was the Ogre of the
family.  The mention of his name cast a dark shadow on the party,
which was not dispelled for fully five minutes.

After it had passed away, they were ten times merrier than before,
from the mere relief of Scrooge the Baleful being done with.  Bob
Cratchit told them how he had a situation in his eye for Master
Peter, which would bring in, if obtained, fully five-and-sixpence
weekly.  The two young Cratchits laughed tremendously at the idea of
Peter's being a man of business; and Peter himself looked
thoughtfully at the fire from between his collars, as if he were
deliberating what particular investments he should favor when he came
into the receipt of that bewildering income.  Martha, who was a poor
apprentice at a milliner's, then told them what kind of work she had
to do, and how many hours she worked at a stretch, and how she meant
to lie abed to-morrow morning for a good long rest; to-morrow being a
holiday she passed at home.  Also how she had seen a countess and a
lord some days before, and how the lord "was much about as tall as
Peter"; at which Peter pulled up his collars so high that you
couldn't have seen his head if you had been there.  All this time the
chestnuts and the jug went round and round; and by and by they had a
song, about a lost child traveling in the snow, from Tiny Tim, who
had a plaintive little voice, and sang it very well indeed.

There was nothing of high mark in this.  They were not a handsome
family; they were not well dressed; their shoes were far from being
waterproof; their clothes were scanty; and Peter might have known,
and very likely did, the inside of a pawnbroker's.  But, they were
happy, grateful, pleased with one another, and contented with the
time; and when they faded, and looked happier yet in the bright
sprinklings of the Spirit's torch at parting, Scrooge had his eye
upon them, and especially on Tiny Tim, until the last.

By this time it was getting dark, and snowing pretty heavily; and as
Scrooge and the Spirit went along the streets, the brightness of the
roaring fires in kitchens, parlors, and all sorts of rooms, was
wonderful.  Here the flickering of the blaze showed preparations for
a cozy dinner, with hot plates baking through and through before the
fire, and deep red curtains, ready to be drawn to shut out cold and
darkness.  There all the children of the house were running out into
the snow to meet their married sisters, brothers, cousins, uncles,
aunts, and be the first to greet them.  Here, again, were shadows on
the window-blind of guests assembling; and there a group of handsome
girls, all hooded and fur-booted, and all chattering at once, tripped
lightly off to some near neighbor's house; where, woe upon the single
man who saw them enter--artful witches: well they knew it--in a glow!

But if you had judged from the numbers of people on their way to
friendly gatherings, you might have thought that no one was at home
to give them welcome when they got there, instead of every house
expecting company, and piling up its fires half-chimney high.
Blessings on it, how the Ghost exulted!  How it bared its breadth of
breast, and opened its capacious palm, and floated on, outpouring,
with a generous hand, its bright and harmless mirth on everything
within its reach!  The very lamplighter, who ran on before dotting
the dusky street with specks of light, and who was dressed to spend
the evening somewhere, laughed out loudly as the Spirit passed:
though little kenned the lamplighter that he had any company but
Christmas!

And now, without a word of warning from the Ghost, they stood upon a
bleak and desert moor, where monstrous masses of rude stone were cast
about, as though it were the burial-place of giants; and water spread
itself wheresoever it listed, or would have done so, but for the
frost that held it prisoner; and nothing grew but moss and furze, and
coarse, rank grass.  Down in the west the setting sun had left a
streak of fiery red, which glared upon the desolation for an instant,
like a sullen eye, and frowning lower, lower, lower yet, was lost in
the thick gloom of darkest night.

"What place is this?" asked Scrooge.

"A place where Miners live, who labor in the bowels of the earth,"
returned the Spirit.  "But they know me.  See!"

A light shone from the window of a hut, and swiftly they advanced
toward it.  Passing through the wall of mud and stone, they found a
cheerful company assembled round a glowing fire.  An old, old man and
woman, with their children and their children's children, and another
generation beyond that, all decked out gaily in their holiday attire.
The old man, in a voice that seldom rose above the howling of the
wind upon the barren waste, was singing them a Christmas song; it had
been a very old song when he was a boy; and from time to time they
all joined in the chorus.  So surely as they raised their voices, the
old man got quite blithe and loud; and so surely as they stopped, his
vigor sank again.

The Spirit did not tarry here, but bade Scrooge hold his robe, and
passing on above the moor, sped whither?  Not to sea?  To sea.  To
Scrooge's horror, looking back, he saw the last of the land, a
frightful range of rocks, behind them; and his ears were deafened by
the thundering of water, as it rolled, and roared, and raged among
the dreadful caverns it had worn, and fiercely tried to undermine the
earth.

Built upon a dismal reef of sunken rocks, some league or so from
shore, on which the waters chafed and dashed, the wild year through,
there stood a solitary lighthouse.  Great heaps of seaweed clung to
its base, and storm-birds--born of the wind one might suppose, as
seaweed of the water--rose and fell about it, like the waves they
skimmed.

But even here, two men who watched the light had made a fire, that
through the loophole in the thick stone wall shed out a ray of
brightness on the awful sea.  Joining their horny hands over the
rough table at which they sat, they wished each other Merry Christmas
in their can of grog; and one of them: the elder, too, with his face
all damaged and scarred with hard weather, as the figure-head of an
old ship might be: struck up a sturdy song that was like a Gale in
itself.

Again the Ghost sped on, above the black and heaving sea--on,
on--until, being far away, as he told Scrooge, from any shore, they
lighted on a ship.  They stood beside the helmsman at the wheel, the
lookout in the bow, the officers who had the watch; dark, ghostly
figures in their several stations; but every man among them hummed a
Christmas tune, or had a Christmas thought, or spoke below his breath
to his companion of some bygone Christmas Day, with homeward hopes
belonging to it.  And every man on board, waking or sleeping, good or
bad, had had a kinder word for another on that day than on any day in
the year; and had shared to some extent in its festivities; and had
remembered those he cared for at a distance, and had known that they
delighted to remember him.

It was a great surprise to Scrooge, while listening to the moaning of
the wind, and thinking what a solemn thing it was to move on through
the lonely darkness over an unknown abyss, whose depths were secrets
as profound as Death: it was a great surprise to Scrooge, while thus
engaged, to hear a hearty laugh.  It was a much greater surprise to
Scrooge to recognize it as his own nephew's and to find himself in a
bright, dry, gleaming room, with the Spirit standing smiling by his
side, and looking at that same nephew with approving affability.

"Ha, ha!" laughed Scrooge's nephew.  "Ha, ha, ha!"

If you should happen, by any unlikely chance, to know a man more
blest in a laugh than Scrooge's nephew, all I can say is, I should
like to know him too.  Introduce him to me, and I'll cultivate his
acquaintance.

It is a fair, even-handed, noble adjustment of things, that while
there is infection in disease and sorrow, there is nothing in the
world so irresistibly contagious as laughter and good-humor.  When
Scrooge's nephew laughed in this way: holding his sides, rolling his
head, and twisting his face into the most extravagant contortions:
Scrooge's niece, by marriage, laughed as heartily as he.  And their
assembled friends being not a bit behindhand, roared out, lustily.

"Ha, ha!  Ha, ha, ha, ha!"

"He said that Christmas was a humbug, as I live!" cried Scrooge's
nephew.  "He believed it too!"

"More shame for him, Fred!" said Scrooge's niece, indignantly.  Bless
those women; they never do anything by halves.  They are always in
earnest.

She was very pretty; exceedingly pretty.  With a dimpled,
surprised-looking, capital face; a ripe little mouth, that seemed
made to be kissed--as no doubt it was; all kinds of good little dots
about her chin, that melted into one another when she laughed; and
the sunniest pair of eyes you ever saw in any little creature's head.
Altogether she was what you would have called provoking, you know;
but satisfactory, too.  Oh, perfectly satisfactory!

"He's a comical old fellow," said Scrooge's nephew, "that's the
truth; and not so pleasant as he might be.  However, his offenses
carry their own punishment, and I have nothing to say against him."

"I'm sure he is very rich, Fred," hinted Scrooge's niece.  "At least
you always tell _me_ so."

"What of that, my dear!" said Scrooge's nephew.  "His wealth is of no
use to him.  He don't do any good with it.  He don't make himself
comfortable with it.  He hasn't the satisfaction of thinking--ha, ha,
ha!--that he is ever going to benefit Us with it."

"I have no patience with him," observed Scrooge's niece.  Scrooge's
niece's sisters, and all the other ladies, expressed the same opinion.

"Oh, I have!" said Scrooge's nephew.  "I am sorry for him; I couldn't
be angry with him if I tried.  Who suffers by his ill whims?
Himself, always.  Here, he takes it into his head to dislike us, and
he won't come and dine with us.  What's the consequence?  He don't
lose much of a dinner."

"Indeed, I think he loses a very good dinner," interrupted Scrooge's
niece.  Everybody else said the same, and they must be allowed to
have been competent judges, because they had just had dinner; and,
with the dessert upon the table, were clustered round the fire, by
lamplight.

"Well!  I'm very glad to hear it," said Scrooge's nephew, "because I
haven't any great faith in these young housekeepers.  What do you
say, Topper?"

Topper had clearly got his eye upon one of Scrooge's niece's sisters,
for he answered that a bachelor was a wretched outcast, who had no
right to express an opinion on the subject.  Whereat Scrooge's
niece's sister--the plump one with the lace tucker: not the one with
the roses--blushed.

"Do go on, Fred," said Scrooge's niece, clapping her hands.  "He
never finishes what he begins to say.  He is such a ridiculous
fellow!"

Scrooge's nephew reveled in another laugh, and as it was impossible
to keep the infection off; though the plump sister tried hard to do
it with aromatic vinegar; his example was unanimously followed.

"I was only going to say," said Scrooge's nephew, "that the
consequence of his taking a dislike to us, and not making merry with
us, is, as I think, that he loses some pleasant moments, which could
do him no harm.  I am sure he loses pleasanter companions than he can
find in his own thoughts, either in his moldy old office, or his
dusty chambers.  I mean to give him the same chance every year,
whether he likes it or not, for I pity him.  He may rail at Christmas
till he dies, but he can't help thinking better of it--I defy him--if
he finds me going there, in good temper, year after year, and saying,
'Uncle Scrooge, how are you?'  If it only puts him in the vein to
leave his poor clerk fifty pounds, _that's_ something; and I think I
shook him yesterday."

It was their turn to laugh now at the notion of his shaking Scrooge.
But being thoroughly good-natured, and not much caring what they
laughed at, so that they laughed at any rate, he encouraged them in
their merriment, and passed the bottle joyously.

After tea, they had some music.  For they were a musical family, and
knew what they were about, when they sang a Glee or Catch, I can
assure you: especially Topper, who could growl away in the bass like
a good one, and never swell the large veins in his forehead, or get
red in the face over it.  Scrooge's niece played well upon the harp;
and played among other tunes a simple little air (a mere nothing: you
might learn to whistle it in two minutes), which had been familiar to
the child who fetched Scrooge from the boarding-school, as he had
been reminded by the Ghost of Christmas Past.  When this strain of
music sounded, all the things that Ghost had shown him came upon his
mind; he softened more and more; and thought that if he could have
listened to it often, years ago, he might have cultivated the
kindnesses of life for his own happiness with his own hands, without
resorting to the sexton's spade that buried Jacob Marley.

But they didn't devote the whole evening to music.  After a while
they played at forfeits; for it is good to be children sometimes, and
never better than at Christmas, when its mighty Founder was a child
himself.  Stop!  There was first a game at blind-man's buff.  Of
course there was.  And I no more believe Topper was really blind than
I believe he had eyes in his boots.  My opinion is, that it was a
done thing between him and Scrooge's nephew: and that the Ghost of
Christmas Present knew it.  The way he went after that plump sister
in the lace tucker was an outrage on the credulity of human nature.
Knocking down the fire-irons, tumbling over the chairs, bumping up
against the piano, smothering himself among the curtains, wherever
she went, there went he.  He always knew where the plump sister was.
He wouldn't catch anybody else.  If you had fallen up against him, as
some of them did, and stood there; he would have made a feint of
endeavoring to seize you, which would have been an affront to your
understanding; and would instantly have sidled off in the direction
of the plump sister.  She often cried out that it wasn't fair; and it
really was not.  But when at last he caught her; when, in spite of
all her silken rustlings, and her rapid flutterings past him, he got
her into a corner whence there was no escape; then his conduct was
the most execrable.  For his pretending not to know her; his
pretending that it was necessary to touch her head-dress, and further
to assure himself of her identity by pressing a certain ring upon her
finger, and a certain chain about her neck; was vile, monstrous!  No
doubt she told him her opinion of it, when, another blind man being
in office, they were so very confidential together, behind the
curtains.

Scrooge's niece was not one of the blind-man's buff party, but was
made comfortable with a large chair and a footstool, in a snug
corner, where the Ghost and Scrooge were close behind her.  But she
joined in the forfeits, and loved her love to admiration with all the
letters of the alphabet.  Likewise at the game of How, When, and
Where, she was very great, and to the secret joy of Scrooge's nephew,
beat her sisters hollow: though they were sharp girls too, as Topper
could have told you.  There might have been twenty people there,
young and old, but they all played, and so did Scrooge; for, wholly
forgetting in the interest he had in what was going on, that his
voice made no sound in their ears, he sometimes came out with his
guess quite loud, and very often guessed quite right, too; for the
sharpest needle, best Whitechapel, warranted not to cut in the eye,
was not sharper than Scrooge: blunt as he took it in his head to be.

The Ghost was greatly pleased to find him in this mood, and looked
upon him with such favor that he begged like a boy to be allowed to
stay until the guests departed.  But this the Spirit said could not
be done.

"Here is a new game," said Scrooge.  "One half-hour, Spirit, only
one!"

It is a Game called Yes and No, where Scrooge's nephew had to think
of something, and the rest must find out what; he only answering to
their questions yes or no, as the case was.  The brisk fire of
questioning to which he was exposed elicited from him that he was
thinking of an animal, a live animal, rather a disagreeable animal, a
savage animal, an animal that growled and grunted sometimes, and
talked sometimes, and lived in London, and walked about the streets,
and wasn't made a show of, and wasn't led by anybody, and didn't live
in a menagerie, and was never killed in a market, and was not a
horse, or an ass, or a cow, or a bull, or a tiger, or a dog, or a
pig, or a cat, or a bear.  At every fresh question that was put to
him, this nephew burst into a fresh roar of laughter; and was so
inexpressibly tickled that he was obliged to get up off the sofa and
stamp.  At last the plump sister, falling into a similar state, cried
out:

"I have found it out!  I know what it is, Fred!  I know what it is!"

"What is it?" cried Fred.

"It's your Uncle Scro-o-o-o-oge!"

Which it certainly was.  Admiration was the universal sentiment,
though some objected that the reply to "Is it a bear?" ought to have
been "Yes"; inasmuch as an answer in the negative was sufficient to
have diverted their thoughts from Mr. Scrooge, supposing they had
ever had any tendency that way.

"He has given us plenty of merriment, I am sure," said Fred, "and it
would be ungrateful not to drink his health.  Here is a glass of
mulled wine ready to our hand at the moment; and I say, 'Uncle
Scrooge!'"

"Well!  Uncle Scrooge!" they cried.

"A Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year to the old man, whatever he
is!" said Scrooge's nephew.  "He wouldn't take it from me, but may he
have it, nevertheless.  Uncle Scrooge!"

Uncle Scrooge had imperceptibly become so gay and light of heart that
he would have pledged the unconscious company in return, and thanked
them in an inaudible speech, if the Ghost had given him time.  But
the whole scene passed off in the breath of the last word spoken by
his nephew; and he and the Spirit were again upon their travels.

Much they saw, and far they went, and many homes they visited, but
always with a happy end.  The Spirit stood beside sick beds, and they
were cheerful; on foreign lands, and they were close at home; by
struggling men, and they were patient in their greater hope; by
poverty, and it was rich.  In almshouse, hospital, and jail, in
misery's every refuge, where vain man in his little brief authority
had not made fast the door, and barred the Spirit out, he left his
blessing, and taught Scrooge his precepts.

It was a long night, if it were only a night; but Scrooge had his
doubts of this, because the Christmas Holidays appeared to be
condensed into the space of time they passed together.  It was
strange, too, that while Scrooge remained unaltered in his outward
form, the Ghost grew older, clearly older.  Scrooge had observed this
change, but never spoke of it until they left a children's Twelfth
Night party, when, looking at the Spirit as they stood together in an
open place, he noticed that its hair was gray.

"Are spirits' lives so short?" asked Scrooge.

"My life upon this globe is very brief," replied the Ghost.  "It ends
to-night."

"To-night!" cried Scrooge.

"To-night at midnight.  Hark!  The time is drawing near."

The chimes were ringing the three-quarters past eleven at that moment.

"Forgive me if I am not justified in what I ask," said Scrooge,
looking intently at the Spirit's robe, "but I see something strange,
and not belonging to yourself, protruding from your skirts.  Is it a
foot or a claw!"

"It might be a claw, for the flesh there is upon it," was the
Spirit's sorrowful reply.  "Look here."

From the foldings of its robe it brought two children; wretched,
abject, frightful, hideous, miserable.  They knelt down at its feet,
and clung upon the outside of its garment.

"Oh, Man! look here.  Look, look, down here!" exclaimed the Ghost.

They were a boy and girl.  Yellow, meagre, ragged, scowling, wolfish;
but, prostrate, too, in their humility.  Where graceful youth should
have filled their features out, and touched them with its freshest
tints, a stale and shriveled hand, like that of age, had pinched, and
twisted them, and pulled them into shreds.  Where angels might have
sat enthroned, devils lurked, and glared out menacing.  No change, no
degradation, no perversion of humanity, in any grade, through all the
mysteries of wonderful creation, has monsters half so horrible and
dread.

Scrooge started back, appalled.  Having them shown to him in this
way, he tried to say they were fine children, but the words choked
themselves rather than be parties to a lie of such enormous magnitude.

"Spirit! are they yours?" Scrooge could say no more.

"They are Man's," said the Spirit, looking down upon them.  "And they
cling to me, appealing from their fathers.  This boy is Ignorance.
This girl is Want.  Beware them both, and all of their degree, but
most of all beware this boy, for on his brow I see that written which
is Doom, unless the writing be erased.  Deny it!" cried the Spirit,
stretching out its hand toward the City.  "Slander those who tell it
ye!  Admit it for your factious purposes, and make it worse!  And
bide the end!"

"Have they no refuge or resource?" cried Scrooge.

"Are there no prisons?" said the Spirit, turning on him for the last
time with his own words.  "Are there no workhouses?"

The bell struck twelve.

Scrooge looked about him for the Ghost, and saw it not.  As the last
stroke ceased to vibrate, he remembered the prediction of old Jacob
Marley, and lifting up his eyes, beheld a solemn Phantom, draped and
hooded, coming, like a mist along the ground, toward him.




STAVE FOUR

_The Last of the Spirits_

The phantom slowly, gravely, silently approached.  When it came near
him, Scrooge bent down upon his knee; for in the very air through
which this Spirit moved it seemed to scatter gloom and mystery.

It was shrouded in a deep black garment, which concealed its head,
its face, its form, and left nothing of it visible save one
outstretched hand.  But for this it would have been difficult to
detach its figure from the night, and separate it from the darkness
by which it was surrounded.

He felt that it was tall and stately when it came beside him, and
that its mysterious presence filled him with a solemn dread.  He knew
no more, for the Spirit neither spoke nor moved.

"I am in the presence of the Ghost of Christmas Yet To Come?" said
Scrooge.

The Spirit answered not, but pointed downward with its hand.

"You are about to show me shadows of the things that have not
happened, but will happen in the time before us," Scrooge pursued.
"Is that so, Spirit?"

The upper portion of the garment was contracted for an instant in its
folds, as if the Spirit had inclined its head.  That was the only
answer he received.

Although well used to ghostly company by this time, Scrooge feared
the silent shape so much that his legs trembled beneath him, and he
found that he could hardly stand when he prepared to follow it.  The
Spirit paused a moment, as if observing his condition, and giving him
time to recover.

But Scrooge was all the worse for this.  It thrilled him with a vague
uncertain horror, to know that behind the dusky shroud there were
ghostly eyes intently fixed upon him, while he, though he stretched
his own to the utmost, could see nothing but a spectral hand and one
great heap of black.

"Ghost of the Future!" he exclaimed, "I fear you more than any
Spectre I have seen.  But, as I know your purpose is to do me good,
and as I hope to live to be another man from what I was, I am
prepared to bear you company, and do it with a thankful heart.  Will
you not speak to me?"

It gave him no reply.  The hand was pointed straight before them.

"Lead on!" said Scrooge.  "Lead on!  The night is waning fast, and it
is precious time to me, I know.  Lead on, Spirit!"

The Phantom moved away as it had come toward him.  Scrooge followed
in the shadow of its dress, which bore him up, he thought, and
carried him along.

They scarcely seemed to enter the City; for the City rather seemed to
spring up about them, and encompass them of its own act.  But there
they were, in the heart of it; on 'Change, among the merchants; who
hurried up and down, and chinked the money in their pockets, and
conversed in groups, and looked at their watches, and trifled
thoughtfully with their great gold seals; and so forth, as Scrooge
had seen them often.

The Spirit stopped beside one little knot of business men.  Observing
that the hand was pointed to them, Scrooge advanced to listen to
their talk.

"No," said a great fat man with a monstrous chin, "I don't know much
about it, either way.  I only know he's dead."

"When did he die?" inquired another.

"Last night, I believe."

"Why, what was the matter with him?" asked a third, taking a vast
quantity of snuff out of a very large snuffbox.  "I thought he'd
never die."

"God knows," said the first, with a yawn.

"What has he done with his money?" asked a red-faced gentleman with a
pendulous excrescence on the end of his nose, that shook like the
gills of a turkey-cock.

"I haven't heard," said the man with the large chin, yawning again.
"Left it to his Company, perhaps.  He hasn't left it to me.  That's
all I know."

This pleasantry was received with a general laugh.

"It's likely to be a very cheap funeral," said the same speaker; "for
upon my life I don't know of anybody to go to it.  Suppose we make up
a party and volunteer?"

"I don't mind going if a lunch is provided," observed the gentleman
with the excrescence on his nose.  "But I must be fed, if I make one."

Another laugh.

"Well, I am the most disinterested among you, after all," said the
first speaker, "for I never wear black gloves, and I never eat lunch.
But I'll offer to go, if anybody else will.  When I come to think of
it, I'm not at all sure that I wasn't his most particular friend; for
we used to stop and speak whenever we met.  By-by!"

Speakers and listeners strolled away, and mixed with other groups.
Scrooge knew the men, and looked toward the Spirit for an explanation.

The Phantom glided on into a street.  Its finger pointed to two
persons meeting.  Scrooge listened again, thinking that the
explanation might lie here.

He knew these men, also, perfectly.  They were men of business: very
wealthy, and of great importance.  He had made a point always of
standing well in their esteem: in a business point of view, that is;
strictly in a business point of view.

"How are you?" said one.

"How are you?" returned the other.

"Well!" said the first.  "Old Scratch has got his own at last, hey?"

"So I am told," returned the second.  "Cold, isn't it?"

"Seasonable for Christmas time.  You're not a skater, I suppose?"

"No.  No.  Something else to think of.  Good-morning!"

Not another word.  That was their meeting, their conversation, and
their parting.

Scrooge was at first inclined to be surprised that the Spirit should
attach importance to conversations apparently so trivial; but feeling
assured that they must have some hidden purpose, he set himself to
consider what it was likely to be.  They could scarcely be supposed
to have any bearing on the death of Jacob, his old partner, for that
was Past, and this Ghost's province was the Future.  Nor could he
think of any one immediately connected with himself to whom he could
apply them.  But nothing doubting that to whomsoever they applied
they had some latent moral for his own improvement, he resolved to
treasure up every word he heard, and everything he saw; and
especially to observe the shadow of himself when it appeared.  For he
had an expectation that the conduct of his future self would give him
the clue he missed, and would render the solution of these riddles
easy.

He looked about in that very place for his own image; but another man
stood in his accustomed corner, and though the clock pointed to his
usual time of day for being there, he saw no likeness of himself
among the multitudes that poured in through the Porch.  It gave him
little surprise, however; for he had been revolving in his mind a
change of life, and thought and hoped he saw his new-born resolutions
carried out in this.

Quiet and dark beside him stood the Phantom, with its outstretched
hand.  When he roused himself from his thoughtful quest, he fancied
from the turn of the hand, and its situation in reference to himself,
that the Unseen Eyes were looking at him keenly.  It made him
shudder, and feel very cold.

They left the busy scene, and went into an obscure part of the town,
where Scrooge had never penetrated before, although he recognized its
situation, and its bad repute.  The ways were foul and narrow; the
shops and houses wretched; the people half-naked, drunken, slipshod,
ugly.  Alleys and archways, like so many cesspools, disgorged their
offenses of smell, and dirt, and life, upon the straggling streets;
and the whole quarter reeked with crime; with filth, and misery.

Far in this den of infamous resort, there was a low-browed, beetling
shop, below a pent-house roof, where iron, old rags, bottles, bones,
and greasy offal, were bought.  Upon the floor within, were piled up
heaps of rusty keys, nails, chains, hinges, files, scales, weights,
and refuse iron of all kinds.  Secrets that few would like to
scrutinize were bred and hidden in mountains of unseemly rags, masses
of corrupted fat, and sepulchres of bones.  Sitting in among the
wares he dealt in, by a charcoal-stove, made of old bricks, was a
gray-haired rascal, nearly seventy years of age; who had screened
himself from the cold air without by a frowsy curtaining of
miscellaneous tatters hung upon a line; and smoked his pipe in all
the luxury of calm retirement.

Scrooge and the Phantom came into the presence of this man, just as a
woman with a heavy bundle slunk into the shop.  But she had scarcely
entered, when another woman, similarly laden, came in too; and she
was closely followed by a man in faded black, who was no less
startled by the sight of them than they had been upon the recognition
of each other.  After a short period of blank astonishment, in which
the old man with the pipe had joined them, they all three burst into
a laugh.

"Let the charwoman alone to be the first!" cried she who had entered
first.  "Let the laundress alone to be the second; and let the
undertaker's man alone to be the third.  Look here, old Joe, here's a
chance!  If we haven't all three met here without meaning it!"

"You couldn't have met in a better place," said old Joe, removing his
pipe from his mouth.  "Come into the parlor.  You were made free of
it long ago, you know; and the other two an't strangers.  Stop till I
shut the door of the shop.  Ah!  How it skreeks!  There an't such a
rusty bit of metal in the place as its own hinges, I believe; and I'm
sure there's no such old bones here as mine.  Ha, ha!  We're all
suitable to our calling, we're well matched.  Come into the parlor.
Come into the parlor."

The parlor was the space behind the screen of rags.  The old man
raked the fire together with an old stair-rod, and having trimmed his
smoky lamp (for it was night) with the stem of his pipe, put it in
his mouth again.

While he did this, the woman who had already spoken threw her bundle
on the floor, and sat down in a flaunting manner on a stool; crossing
her elbows on her knees, and looking with a bold defiance at the
other two.

"What odds then!  What odds, Mrs. Dilber?" said the woman.  "Every
person has a right to take care of themselves.  _He_ always did!"

"That's true, indeed!" said the laundress.  "No man more so."

"Why, then, don't stand staring as if you was afraid, woman; who's
the wiser?  We're not going to pick holes in each other's coats, I
suppose?"

"No, indeed!" said Mrs. Dilber and the man together.  "We should hope
not."

"Very well, then!" cried the woman.  "That's enough.  Who's the worse
for the loss of a few things like these?  Not a dead man, I suppose."

"No, indeed," said Mrs. Dilber, laughing.

"If he wanted to keep 'em after he was dead, a wicked old screw,"
pursued the woman, "why wasn't he natural in his lifetime?  If he had
been, he'd have had somebody to look after him when he was struck
with Death, instead of lying gasping out his last there, alone by
himself."

"It's the truest word that ever was spoke," said Mrs. Dilber.  "It's
a judgment on him."

"I wish it was a little heavier one," replied the woman; "and it
should have been, you may depend upon it, if I could have laid my
hands on anything else.  Open that bundle, old Joe, and let me know
the value of it.  Speak out plain.  I'm not afraid to be the first,
nor afraid for them to see it.  We knew pretty well that we were
helping ourselves, before we met here, I believe.  It's no sin.  Open
the bundle, Joe."

But the gallantry of her friends would not allow of this; and the man
in faded black, mounting the breach first, produced his plunder.  It
was not extensive.  A seal or two, a pencil-case, a pair of
sleeve-buttons, and a brooch of no great value, were all.  They were
severally examined and appraised by old Joe, who chalked the sums he
was disposed to give for each upon the wall, and added them up into a
total when he found there was nothing more to come.

"That's your account," said Joe, "and I wouldn't give another
sixpence if I was to be boiled for not doing it.  Who's next?"

Mrs. Dilber was next.  Sheets and towels, a little wearing apparel,
two old-fashioned silver teaspoons, a pair of sugar-tongs, and a few
boots.  Her account was stated on the wall in the same manner.

"I always give too much to ladies.  It's a weakness of mine, and
that's the way I ruin myself," said old Joe.  "That's your account.
If you asked me for another penny, and made it an open question, I'd
repent of being so liberal and knock off half-a-crown."

"And now undo my bundle, Joe," said the first woman.

Joe went down on his knees for the greater convenience of opening it,
and having unfastened a great many knots, dragged out a large and
heavy roll of some dark stuff.

"What do you call this?" said Joe.  "Bed-curtains!"

"Ah!" returned the woman, laughing and leaning forward on her crossed
arms.  "Bed-curtains!"

"You don't mean to say you took 'em down, rings and all, with him
lying there?" said Joe.

"Yes, I do," replied the woman.  "Why not?"

"You were born to make your fortune," said Joe, "and you'll certainly
do it."

"I certainly shan't hold my hand when I can get anything in it by
reaching it out, for the sake of such a man as He was, I promise you,
Joe," returned the woman coolly.  "Don't drop that oil upon the
blankets, now."

"His blankets?" asked Joe.

"Whose else's do you think?" replied the woman.  "He isn't likely to
take cold without 'em, I dare say."

"I hope he didn't die of anything catching, eh?" said old Joe,
stopping in his work, and looking up.

"Don't you be afraid of that," returned the woman.  "I an't so fond
of his company that I'd loiter about him for such things, if he did.
Ah! you may look through that shirt till your eyes ache; but you
won't find a hole in it, nor a threadbare place.  It's the best he
had, and a fine one too.  They'd have wasted it, if it hadn't been
for me."

"What do you call wasting of it?" asked old Joe.

"Putting it on him to be buried in, to be sure," replied the woman
with a laugh.  "Somebody was fool enough to do it, but I took it off
again.  If calico an't good enough for such a purpose, it isn't good
enough for anything.  It's quite as becoming to the body.  He can't
look uglier than he did in that one."

Scrooge listened to this dialogue in horror.  As they sat grouped
about their spoil, in the scanty light afforded by the old man's
lamp, he viewed them with a detestation and disgust which could
hardly have been greater, though they had been obscene demons,
marketing the corpse itself.

"Ha, ha!" laughed the same woman, when old Joe, producing a flannel
bag with money in it, told out their several gains upon the ground.
"This is the end of it, you see!  He frightened every one away from
him when he was alive, to profit us when he was dead!  Ha, ha, ha!"

"Spirit!" said Scrooge, shuddering from head to foot.  "I see, I see.
The case of this unhappy man might be my own.  My life tends that
way, now.  Merciful Heaven, what is this!"

He recoiled in terror, for the scene had changed, and now he almost
touched a bed: a bare, uncurtained bed: on which, beneath a ragged
sheet, there lay a something covered up, which, though it was dumb,
announced itself in awful language.

The room was very dark, too dark to be observed with any accuracy,
though Scrooge glanced round it in obedience to a secret impulse,
anxious to know what kind of room it was.  A pale light, rising in
the outer air, fell straight upon the bed; and on it, plundered and
bereft, unwatched, unwept, uncared for, was the body of this man.

Scrooge glanced toward the Phantom.  Its steady hand was pointed to
the head.  The cover was so carelessly adjusted that the slightest
raising of it, the motion of a finger upon Scrooge's part, would have
disclosed the face.  He thought of it, felt how easy it would be to
do, and longed to do it; but had no more power to withdraw the veil
than to dismiss the spectre at his side.

Oh, cold, cold, rigid, dreadful Death, set up thine altar here, and
dress it with such terrors as thou hast at thy command: for this is
thy dominion!  But of the loved, revered, and honored head, thou
canst not turn one hair to thy dread purposes, or make one feature
odious.  It is not that the hand is heavy and will fall down when
released; it is not that the heart and pulse are still; but that the
hand was open, generous, and true; the heart brave, warm, and tender;
and the pulse a man's.  Strike, Shadow, strike!  And see his good
deeds springing from the wound, to sow the world with life immortal!

No voice pronounced these words in Scrooge's ears, and yet he heard
them when he looked upon the bed.  He thought, if this man could be
raised up now, what would be his foremost thoughts?  Avarice, hard
dealing, griping cares?  They have brought him to a rich end, truly!

He lay in the dark, empty house, with not a man, a woman, or a child
to say that he was kind to me in this or that, and for the memory of
one kind word I will be kind to him.  A cat was tearing at the door,
and there was a sound of gnawing rats beneath the hearthstone.  What
they wanted in the room of death, and why they were so restless and
disturbed, Scrooge did not dare to think.

"Spirit!" he said, "this is a fearful place.  In leaving it, I shall
not leave its lesson, trust me.  Let us go!"

Still the Ghost pointed with an unmoved finger to the head.

"I understand you," Scrooge returned, "and I would do it, if I could.
But I have not the power, Spirit.  I have not the power."

Again it seemed to look upon him.

"If there is any person in the town who feels emotion caused by this
man's death," said Scrooge, quite agonized, "show that person to me,
Spirit, I beseech you!"

The Phantom spread its dark robe before him for a moment, like a
wing; and withdrawing it, revealed a room by daylight, where a mother
and her children were.

She was expecting some one, and with anxious eagerness; for she
walked up and down the room; started at every sound; looked out from
the window; glanced at the clock; tried, but in vain, to work with
her needle; and could hardly bear the voices of the children in their
play.

At length the long-expected knock was heard.  She hurried to the
door, and met her husband; a man whose face was careworn and
depressed, though he was young.  There was a remarkable expression in
it now; a kind of serious delight of which he felt ashamed, and which
he struggled to repress.

He sat down to the dinner that had been hoarding for him by the fire;
and when she asked him faintly what news (which was not until after a
long silence), he appeared embarrassed how to answer.

"Is it good," she said, "or bad?"--to help him.

"Bad," he answered.

"We are quite ruined?"

"No.  There is hope yet, Caroline."

"If _he_ relents," she said, amazed, "there is!  Nothing is past
hope, if such a miracle has happened."

"He is past relenting," said her husband.  "He is dead."

She was a mild and patient creature if her face spoke truth; but she
was thankful in her soul to hear it, and she said so, with clasped
hands.  She prayed forgiveness the next moment, and was sorry; but
the first was the emotion of her heart.

"What the half-drunken woman whom I told you of last night, said to
me, when I tried to see him and obtain a week's delay; and what I
thought was a mere excuse to avoid me; turns out to have been quite
true.  He was not only very ill, but dying, then."

"To whom will our debt be transferred?"

"I don't know.  But before that time we shall be ready with the
money; and even though we were not, it would be bad fortune indeed to
find so merciless a creditor in his successor.  We may sleep to-night
with light hearts, Caroline!"

Yes.  Soften it as they would, their hearts were lighter.  The
children's faces, hushed, and clustered round to hear what they so
little understood, were brighter; and it was a happier house for this
man's death!  The only emotion that the Ghost could show him, caused
by the event, was one of pleasure.

"Let me see some tenderness connected with a death," said Scrooge;
"or that dark chamber, Spirit, which we left just now, will be
forever present to me."

The Ghost conducted him through several streets familiar to his feet;
and as they went along, Scrooge looked here and there to find
himself, but nowhere was he to be seen.  They entered poor Bob
Cratchit's house; the dwelling he had visited before; and found the
mother and the children seated round the fire.

Quiet.  Very quiet.  The noisy little Cratchits were as still as
statues in one corner, and sat looking up at Peter, who had a book
before him.  The mother and her daughters were engaged in sewing.
But surely they were very quiet!

"'And He took a child, and set him in the midst of them.'"

Where had Scrooge heard those words?  He had not dreamed them.  The
boy must have read them out, as he and the Spirit crossed the
threshold.  Why did he not go on?  The mother laid her work upon the
table, and put her hand up to her face.

"The color hurts my eyes," she said.

The color?  Ah, poor Tiny Tim!

"They're better now again," said Cratchit's wife.  "It makes them
weak by candlelight; and I wouldn't show weak eyes to your father
when he comes home, for the world.  It must be near his time."

"Past it rather," Peter answered, shutting up his book.  "But I think
he's walked a little slower than he used, these few last evenings,
mother."

They were very quiet again.  At last she said, and in a steady
cheerful voice, that only faltered once:

"I have known him walk with--I have known him walk with Tiny Tim upon
his shoulder, very fast indeed."

"And so have I," cried Peter.  "Often."

"And so have I," exclaimed another.  So had all.

"But he was very light to carry," she resumed, intent upon her work,
"and his father loved him so, that it was no trouble--no trouble.
And there is your father at the door!"

She hurried out to meet him; and little Bob in his comforter--he had
need of it, poor fellow--came in.  His tea was ready for him on the
hob, and they all tried who should help him to it most.  Then the two
young Cratchits got upon his knees and laid, each child a little
cheek, against his face, as if they said, "Don't mind it, father.
Don't be grieved!"

Bob was very cheerful with them, and spoke pleasantly to all the
family.  He looked at the work upon the table, and praised the
industry and speed of Mrs. Cratchit and the girls.  They would be
done long before Sunday he said.

"Sunday?  You went to-day, then, Robert?" said his wife.

"Yes, my dear," returned Bob.  "I wish you could have gone.  It would
have done you good to see how green a place it is.  But you'll see it
often.  I promised him that I would walk there on a Sunday.  My
little, little child!" cried Bob.  "My little child!"

He broke down all at once.  He couldn't help it.  If he could have
helped it, he and his child would have been further apart perhaps
than they were.

He left the room, and went upstairs into the room above, which was
lighted cheerfully, and hung with Christmas.  There was a chair set
close beside the child, and there were signs of some one having been
there, lately.  Poor Bob sat down in it, and when he had thought a
little and composed himself, he kissed the little face.  He was
reconciled to what had happened, and went down again quite happy.

They drew about the fire, and talked; the girls and mother working
still.  Bob told them of the extraordinary kindness of Mr. Scrooge's
nephew, whom he had scarcely seen but once, and who, meeting him in
the street that day, and seeing that he looked a little--"just a
little down you know," said Bob, inquired what had happened to
distress him.  "On which," said Bob, "for he is the
pleasantest-spoken gentleman you ever heard, I told him.  'I am
heartily sorry for it, Mr. Cratchit,' he said, 'and heartily sorry
for your good wife.'  By the by, how he ever knew that, I don't know."

"Knew what, my dear?"

"Why, that you were a good wife," replied Bob.

"Everybody knows that!" said Peter.

"Very well observed, my boy!" cried Bob.  "I hope they do.  'Heartily
sorry,' he said, 'for your good wife.  If I can be of service to you
in any way,' he said, giving me his card, 'that's where I live.  Pray
come to me.'  Now, it wasn't," cried Bob, "for the sake of anything
he might be able to do for us, so much as for his kind way, that this
was quite delightful.  It really seemed as if he had known our Tiny
Tim, and felt with us."

"I'm sure he's a good soul!" said Mrs. Cratchit.

"You would be surer of it, my dear," returned Bob, "if you saw and
spoke to him.  I shouldn't be at all surprised, mark what I say, if
he got Peter a better situation."

"Only hear that, Peter," said Mrs. Cratchit.

"And then," cried one of the girls, "Peter will be keeping company
with some one, and setting up for himself."

"Get along with you!" retorted Peter, grinning.

"It's just as likely as not," said Bob, "one of these days; though
there's plenty of time for that, my dear.  But however and whenever
we part from one another, I am sure we shall none of us forget poor
Tiny Tim--shall we--or this first parting that there was among us?"

"Never, father!" cried they all.

"And I know," said Bob, "I know, my dears, that when we recollect how
patient and how mild he was; although he was a little, little child;
we shall not quarrel easily among ourselves, and forget poor Tiny Tim
in doing it."

"No, never, father!" they all cried again.

"I am very happy," said little Bob, "I am very happy!"

Mrs. Cratchit kissed him, his daughters kissed him, the two young
Cratchits kissed him, and Peter and himself shook hands.  Spirit of
Tiny Tim, thy childish essence was from God!

"Spectre," said Scrooge, "something informs me that our parting
moment is at hand.  I know it, but I know not how.  Tell me what man
that was whom we saw lying dead?"

The Ghost of Christmas Yet To Come conveyed him, as before--though at
a different time, he thought: indeed, there seemed no order in these
latter visions, save that they were in the Future--into the resorts
of business men, but showed him not himself.  Indeed, the Spirit did
not stay for anything, but went straight on, as to the end just now
desired, until besought by Scrooge to tarry for a moment.

"This court," said Scrooge, "through which we hurry now, is where my
place of occupation is, and has been for a length of time.  I see the
house.  Let me behold what I shall be, in days to come!"

The Spirit stopped; the hand was pointed elsewhere.

"The house is yonder," Scrooge exclaimed.  "Why do you point away?"

The inexorable finger underwent no change.

Scrooge hastened to the window of his office, and looked in.  It was
an office still, but not his.  The furniture was not the same, and
the figure in the chair was not himself.  The Phantom pointed as
before.

He joined it once again, and wondering why and whither he had gone,
accompanied it until they reached an iron gate.  He paused to look
round before entering.

A churchyard.  Here, then, the wretched man whose name he had now to
learn, lay underneath the ground.  It was a worthy place.  Walled in
by houses; overrun by grass and weeds, the growth of vegetation's
death, not life; choked up with too much burying; fat with repleted
appetite.  A worthy place!

The Spirit stood among the graves, and pointed down to One.  He
advanced toward it trembling.  The Phantom was exactly as it had
been, but he dreaded that he saw new meaning in its solemn shape.

"Before I draw nearer to that stone to which you point," said
Scrooge, "answer me one question.  Are these the shadows of the
things that Will be, or are they shadows of things that May be, only?"

Still the Ghost pointed downward to the grave by which it stood.

"Men's courses will foreshadow certain ends, to which, if persevered
in, they must lead," said Scrooge.  "But if the courses be departed
from, the ends will change.  Say it is thus with what you show me!"

The Spirit was immovable as ever.

Scrooge crept toward it, trembling as he went; and following the
finger, read upon the stone of the neglected grave his own name,
"Ebenezer Scrooge."

"Am _I_ that man who lay upon the bed?" he cried, upon his knees.

The finger pointed from the grave to him, and back again.

"No, Spirit!  Oh, no, no!"

The finger still was there.

"Spirit!" he cried, tight clutching at its robe, "hear me!  I am not
the man I was.  I will not be the man I must have been but for this
intercourse.  Why show me this, if I am past all hope!"

For the first time the hand appeared to shake.

"Good Spirit," he pursued, as down upon the ground he fell before it:
"Your nature intercedes for me, and pities me.  Assure me that I yet
may change these shadows you have shown me, by an altered life!"

The kind hand trembled.

"I will honor Christmas in my heart, and try to keep it all the year.
I will live in the Past, the Present, and the Future.  The Spirits of
all Three shall strive within me.  I will not shut out the lessons
that they teach.  Oh, tell me I may sponge away the writing on this
stone!"

In his agony, he caught the spectral hand.  It sought to free itself,
but he was strong in his entreaty, and detained it.  The Spirit,
stronger yet, repulsed him.

Holding up his hand in one last prayer to have his fate reversed, he
saw an alteration in the Phantom's hood and dress.  It shrank,
collapsed, and dwindled down into a bed-post.




STAVE FIVE

_The End of It_

Yes! and the bedpost was his own.  The bed was his own, the room was
his own.  Best and happiest of all, the Time before him was his own,
to make amends in!

"I will live in the Past, the Present, and the Future!" Scrooge
repeated, as he scrambled out of bed.  "The Spirits of all Three
shall strive within me.  Oh, Jacob Marley!  Heaven, and the Christmas
Time be praised for this!  I say it on my knees, old Jacob, on my
knees!"

He was so fluttered and so glowing with his good intentions, that his
broken voice would scarcely answer to his call.  He had been sobbing
violently in his conflict with the Spirit, and his face was wet with
tears.

"They are not torn down," cried Scrooge, folding one of his
bed-curtains in his arms, "they are not torn down, rings and all.
They are here: I am here: the shadows of the things that would have
been may be dispelled.  They will be.  I know they will!"

His hands were busy with his garments all this time: turning them
inside out, putting them on upside down, tearing them, mislaying
them, making them parties to every kind of extravagance.

"I don't know what to do!" cried Scrooge, laughing and crying in the
same breath; and making a perfect Laocoön of himself with his
stockings.  "I am as light as a feather, I am as happy as an angel, I
am as merry as a schoolboy.  I am as giddy as a drunken man.  A Merry
Christmas to everybody!  A Happy New Year to all the world.  Hallo
here!  Whoop!  Hallo!"

He had frisked into the sitting-room, and was now standing there:
perfectly winded.

"There's the saucepan that the gruel was in!" cried Scrooge, starting
off again, and frisking round the fireplace.  "There's the door, by
which the Ghost of Jacob Marley entered!  There's the corner where
the Ghost of Christmas Present sat!  There's the window where I saw
the wandering Spirits!  It's all right, it's all true, it all
happened.  Ha, ha, ha!"

Really, for a man who had been out of practise for so many years, it
was a splendid laugh, a most illustrious laugh.  The father of a
long, long line of brilliant laughs!

"I don't know what day of the month it is!" said Scrooge.  "I don't
know how long I've been among the Spirits.  I don't know anything.
I'm quite a baby.  Never mind.  I don't care.  I'd rather be a baby.
Hallo!  Whoop!  Hallo here!"

He was checked in his transports by the churches ringing out the
lustiest peals he had ever heard.  Clash, clang, hammer, ding, dong,
bell.  Bell, dong, ding, hammer, clang, clash!  Oh, glorious,
glorious!

Running to the window, he opened it, and put out his head.  No fog,
no mist; clear, bright, jovial, stirring, cold; cold, piping for the
blood to dance to; golden sunlight; heavenly sky; sweet fresh air;
merry bells.  Oh, glorious.  Glorious!

"What's to-day?" cried Scrooge, calling downward to a boy in Sunday
clothes, who perhaps had loitered in to look about him.

"Eh?" returned the boy, with all his might of wonder.

"What's to-day, my fine fellow?" said Scrooge.

"To-day!" replied the boy.  "Why, CHRISTMAS DAY."

"It's Christmas Day!" said Scrooge to himself.  "I haven't missed it.
The Spirits have done it all in one night.  They can do anything they
like.  Of course they can.  Of course they can.  Hallo, my fine
fellow!"

"Hallo!" returned the boy.

"Do you know the Poulterer's, in the next street but one, at the
corner?" Scrooge inquired.

"I should hope I did," replied the lad.

"An intelligent boy!" said Scrooge.  "A remarkable boy!  Do you know
whether they've sold the prize turkey that was hanging up there?  Not
the little prize turkey: the big one?"

"What, the one as big as me?" returned the boy.

"What a delightful boy!" said Scrooge.  "It's a pleasure to talk to
him.  Yes, my buck!"

"It's hanging there now," replied the boy.

"Is it?" said Scrooge.  "Go and buy it."

"Walk-_er_!" exclaimed the boy.

"No, no," said Scrooge, "I am in earnest.  Go and buy it, and tell
'em to bring it here, that I may give them the direction where to
take it.  Come back with the man, and I'll give you a shilling.  Come
back with him in less than five minutes, and I'll give you
half-a-crown!"

The boy was off like a shot.  He must have had a steady hand at a
trigger who could have got a shot off half so fast.

"I'll send it to Bob Cratchit's!" whispered Scrooge, rubbing his
hands, and splitting with a laugh.  "He shan't know who sends it.
It's twice the size of Tiny Tim.  Joe Miller never made such a joke
as sending it to Bob's will be!"

The hand in which he wrote the address was not a steady one, but
write it he did, somehow, and went downstairs to open the street
door, ready for the coming of the poulterer's man.  As he stood
there, waiting his arrival, the knocker caught his eye.

"I shall love it, as long as I live!" cried Scrooge, patting it with
his hand.  "I scarcely ever looked at it before.  What an honest
expression it has in its face!  It's a wonderful knocker!--Here's the
Turkey.  Hallo!  Whoop!  How are you!  Merry Christmas!"

It _was_ a Turkey!  He could never have stood upon his legs, that
bird.  He would have snapped 'em short off in a minute, like sticks
of sealing-wax.

"Why, it's impossible to carry that to Camden Town," said Scrooge.
"You must have a cab."

The chuckle with which he said this, and the chuckle with which he
paid for the turkey, and the chuckle with which he paid for the cab,
and the chuckle with which he recompensed the boy, were only to be
exceeded by the chuckle with which he sat down breathless in his
chair again, and chuckled till he cried.

Shaving was not an easy task, for his hand continued to shake very
much; and shaving requires attention, even when you don't dance while
you are at it.  But if he had cut the end of his nose off, he would
have put a piece of sticking-plaster over it, and been quite
satisfied.

He dressed himself "all in his best," and at last got out into the
streets.  The people were by this time pouring forth, as he had seen
them with the Ghost of Christmas Present; and walking with his hands
behind him, Scrooge regarded every one with a delighted smile.  He
looked so irresistibly pleasant, in a word, that three or four
good-humored fellows said: "Good-morning, sir!  A Merry Christmas to
you!"  And Scrooge said often afterward, that of all the blithe
sounds he had ever heard, those were the blithest in his ears.

He had not gone far, when coming on toward him he beheld the portly
gentleman who had walked into his counting-house the day before and
said: "Scrooge and Marley's, I believe?"  It sent a pang across his
heart to think how this old gentleman would look upon him when they
met; but he knew what path lay straight before him, and he took it.

"My dear sir," said Scrooge, quickening his pace, and taking the old
gentleman by both his hands.  "How do you do?  I hope you succeeded
yesterday.  It was very kind of you.  A Merry Christmas to you, sir!"

"Mr. Scrooge?"

"Yes," said Scrooge.  "That is my name, and I fear it may not be
pleasant to you.  Allow me to ask your pardon.  And will you have the
goodness"--here Scrooge whispered in his ear.

"Lord bless me!" cried the gentleman, as if his breath were gone.
"My dear Mr. Scrooge, are you serious?"

"If you please," said Scrooge.  "Not a farthing less.  A great many
back-payments are included in it, I assure you.  Will you do me that
favor?"

"My dear sir," said the other, shaking hands with him.  "I don't know
what to say to such munifi--"

"Don't say anything, please," retorted Scrooge.  "Come and see me.
Will you come and see me?"

"I will!" cried the old gentleman.  And it was clear he meant to do
it.

"Thank'ee," said Scrooge.  "I am much obliged to you.  I thank you
fifty times.  Bless you!"

He went to church, and walked about the streets, and watched the
people hurrying to and fro, and patted children on the head, and
questioned beggars, and looked down into the kitchens of houses, and
up to the windows; and found that everything could yield him
pleasure.  He had never dreamed that any walk--that anything--could
give him so much happiness.  In the afternoon, he turned his steps
toward his nephew's house.

He passed the door a dozen times, before he had the courage to go up
and knock.  But he made a dash, and did it:

"Is your master at home, my dear?" said Scrooge to the girl.  Nice
girl!  Very.

"Yes, sir."

"Where is he, my love?" said Scrooge.

"He's in the dining-room, sir, along with mistress.  I'll show you
upstairs, if you please."

"Thank'ee.  He knows me," said Scrooge, with his hand already on the
dining-room lock.  "I'll go in here, my dear."

He turned it gently, and sidled his face in, round the door.  They
were looking at the table (which was spread out in great array); for
these young housekeepers are always nervous on such points, and like
to see that everything is right.

"Fred!" said Scrooge.

Dear heart alive, how his niece by marriage started!  Scrooge had
forgotten, for the moment, about her sitting in the corner with the
footstool, or he wouldn't have done it, on any account.

"Why, bless my soul!" cried Fred, "who's that?"

"It's I.  Your uncle Scrooge.  I have come to dinner.  Will you let
me in, Fred?"

Let him in!  It is a mercy he didn't shake his arm off.  He was at
home in five minutes.  Nothing could be heartier.  His niece looked
just the same.  So did Topper when _he_ came.  So did the plump
sister, when _she_ came.  So did every one when _they_ came.
Wonderful party, wonderful games, wonderful unanimity, won-der-ful
happiness!

But he was early at the office next morning.  Oh, he was early there.
If he could only be there first, and catch Bob Cratchit coming late!
That was the thing he had set his heart upon.

And he did it; yes he did!  The clock struck nine.  No Bob.  A
quarter past.  No Bob.  He was full eighteen minutes and a half
behind his time.  Scrooge sat with his door wide open, that he might
see him come into the Tank.

His hat was off, before he opened the door; his comforter too.  He
was on his stool in a jiffy; driving away with his pen, as if he were
trying to overtake nine o'clock.

"Hallo!" growled Scrooge, in his accustomed voice as near as he could
feign it.  "What do you mean by coming here at this time of day?"

"I am very sorry, sir," said Bob.  "I am behind my time."

"You are?" repeated Scrooge.  "Yes.  I think you are.  Step this way,
sir, if you please."

"It's only once a year, sir," pleaded Bob, appearing from the Tank.
"It shall not be repeated.  I was making rather merry yesterday, sir."

"Now, I'll tell you what, my friend," said Scrooge, "I am not going
to stand this sort of thing any longer.  And therefore," he
continued, leaping from his stool, and giving Bob such a dig in the
waistcoat that he staggered back into the Tank again: "and therefore
I am about to raise your salary!"

Bob trembled, and got a little nearer to the ruler.  He had a
momentary idea of knocking Scrooge down with it; holding him; and
calling to the people in the court for help and a strait-waistcoat.

"A Merry Christmas, Bob!" said Scrooge, with an earnestness that
could not be mistaken, as he clapped him on the back.  "A merrier
Christmas, Bob, my good fellow, than I have given you for many a
year!  I'll raise your salary, and endeavor to assist your struggling
family, and we will discuss your affairs this very afternoon, over a
Christmas bowl of smoking bishop, Bob!  Make up the fires, and buy
another coal-scuttle before you dot another i, Bob Cratchit!"

Scrooge was better than his word.  He did it all, and infinitely
more; and to Tiny Tim, who did _not_ die, he was a second father.  He
became as good a friend, as good a master, and as good a man, as the
good old City knew, or any other good old city, town, or borough in
the good old world.  Some people laughed to see the alteration in
him, but he let them laugh, and little heeded them; for he was wise
enough to know that nothing ever happened on this globe, for good, at
which some people did not have their fill of laughter in the outset;
and knowing that such as these would be blind anyway, he thought it
quite as well that they should wrinkle up their eyes in grins, as
have the malady in less attractive forms.  His own heart laughed: and
that was quite enough for him.

He had no further intercourse with Spirits, but lived upon the Total
Abstinence Principle, ever afterward; and it was always said of him,
that he knew how to keep Christmas well, if any man alive possessed
the knowledge.  May that be truly said of us, and all of us!  And so,
as Tiny Tim observed, God Bless Us, Every One!



THE SPECTRE BRIDEGROOM

BY WASHINGTON IRVING

_"A torch-bearer in the great procession of English prose writers,"
Irving's style is based on a close study of Addison and the
"Spectator" models._

_"The Sketch-Book," from which this story is taken, has been often
pronounced the best book that came from his pen._



THE SPECTRE BRIDEGROOM

By WASHINGTON IRVING

A TRAVELER'S TALE*

* The erudite reader, well versed in good-for-nothing lore, will
perceive that the above Tale must have been suggested to the old
Swiss by a little French anecdote of a circumstance said to have
taken place at Paris.


  "He that supper for is dight,
  He lyes full cold, I trow, this night!
  Yestreen to chamber I him led,
  This night Gray-steel has made his bed!"
        --_Sir Eger, Sir Grahame_ and _Sir Gray-steel_

On the summit of one of the heights of the Odenwald, a wild and
romantic tract of Upper Germany that lies not far from the confluence
of the Maine and the Rhine, there stood, many, many years since, the
Castle of the Baron Von Landshort.  It is now quite fallen to decay,
and almost buried among beech trees and dark firs; above which,
however, its old watch-tower may still be seen struggling, like the
former possessor I have mentioned, to carry a high head, and look
down upon a neighboring country.

The Baron was a dry branch of the great family of Katzenellenbogen,*
and inherited the relics of the property and all the pride of his
ancestors.  Though the warlike disposition of his predecessors had
much impaired the family possessions, yet the Baron still endeavored
to keep up some show of former state.  The times were peaceable, and
the German nobles, in general, had abandoned their inconvenient old
castles, perched like eagles' nests among the mountains, and had
built more convenient residences in the valleys; still the Baron
remained proudly drawn up in his little fortress, cherishing with
hereditary inveteracy all the old family feuds; so that he was on ill
terms with some of his nearest neighbors, on account of disputes that
had happened between their great-great-grandfathers.


* _I.e., Cat's Elbow_--the name of a family of those parts, very
powerful in former times.  The appellation, we are told, was given in
compliment to a peerless dame of the family, celebrated for a fine
arm.


The Baron had but one child, a daughter; but Nature, when she grants
but one child, always compensates by making it a prodigy; and so it
was with the daughter of the Baron.  All the nurses, gossips, and
country cousins, assured her father that she had not her equal for
beauty in all Germany; and who should know better than they?  She
had, moreover, been brought up with great care, under the
superintendence of two maiden aunts, who had spent some years of
their early life at one of the little German courts, and were skilled
in all the branches of knowledge necessary to the education of a fine
lady.  Under their instructions, she became a miracle of
accomplishments.  By the time she was eighteen she could embroider to
admiration, and had worked whole histories of the saints in tapestry
with such strength of expression in their countenances that they
looked like so many souls in purgatory.  She could read without great
difficulty, and had spelled her way through several church legends,
and almost all the chivalric wonders of the Heldenbuch.  She had even
made considerable proficiency in writing, could sign her own name
without missing a letter, and so legibly that her aunts could read it
without spectacles.  She excelled in making little good-for-nothing
lady-like knickknacks of all kinds; was versed in the most abstruse
dancing of the day; played a number of airs on the harp and guitar;
and knew all the tender ballads of the Minnie-lieders by heart.

Her aunts, too, having been great flirts and coquettes in their
younger days, were admirably calculated to be vigilant guardians and
strict censors of the conduct of their niece; for there is no duenna
so rigidly prudent, and inexorably decorous, as a superannuated
coquette.  She was rarely suffered out of their sight; never went
beyond the domains of the castle, unless well attended, or, rather,
well watched; had continual lectures read to her about strict decorum
and implicit obedience; and, as to the men--pah! she was taught to
hold them at such distance and distrust that, unless properly
authorized, she would not have cast a glance upon the handsomest
cavalier in the world--no, not if he were even dying at her feet.

The good effects of this system were wonderfully apparent.  The young
lady was a pattern of docility and correctness.  While others were
wasting their sweetness in the glare of the world, and liable to be
plucked and thrown aside by every hand, she was coyly blooming into
fresh and lovely womanhood under the protection of those immaculate
spinsters, like a rose-bud blushing forth among guardian thorns.  Her
aunts looked upon her with pride and exultation, and vaunted that
though all the other young ladies in the world might go astray, yet,
thank Heaven, nothing of the kind could happen to the heiress of
Katzenellenbogen.

But however scantily the Baron Von Landshort might be provided with
children, his household was by no means a small one, for Providence
had enriched him with abundance of poor relations.  They, one and
all, possessed the affectionate disposition common to humble
relatives; were wonderfully attached to the Baron, and took every
possible occasion to come in swarms and enliven the castle.  All
family festivals were commemorated by these good people at the
Baron's expense; and when they were filled with good cheer, they
would declare that there was nothing on earth so delightful as these
family meetings, these jubilees of the heart.

The Baron, though a small man, had a large soul, and it swelled with
satisfaction at the consciousness of being the greatest man in the
little world about him.  He loved to tell long stories about the
stark old warriors whose portraits looked grimly down from the walls
around, and he found no listeners equal to those who fed at his
expense.  He was much given to the marvelous, and a firm believer in
all those supernatural tales with which every mountain and valley in
Germany abounds.  The faith of his guests even exceeded his own: they
listened to every tale of wonder with open eyes and mouth, and never
failed to be astonished, even though repeated for the hundredth time.
Thus lived the Baron Von Landshort, the oracle of his table, the
absolute monarch of his little territory, and happy, above all
things, in the persuasion that he was the wisest man of the age.

At the time of which my story treats there was a great family
gathering at the castle, on an affair of the utmost importance: it
was to receive the destined bridegroom of the Baron's daughter.  A
negotiation had been carried on between the father and an old
nobleman of Bavaria, to unite the dignity of their houses by the
marriage of their children.  The preliminaries had been conducted
with proper punctilio.  The young people were betrothed without
seeing each other, and the time was appointed for the marriage
ceremony.  The young Count Von Altenburg had been recalled from the
army for the purpose, and was actually on his way to the Baron's to
receive his bride.  Missives had even been received from him, from
Wurtzburg, where he was accidentally detained, mentioning the day and
hour when he might be expected to arrive.

The castle was in a tumult of preparation to give him a suitable
welcome.  The fair bride had been decked out with uncommon care.  The
two aunts had superintended her toilet, and quarreled the whole
morning about every article of her dress.  The young lady had taken
advantage of their contest to follow the bent of her own taste; and
fortunately it was a good one.  She looked as lovely as youthful
bridegroom could desire; and the flutter of expectation heightened
the lustre of her charms.

The suffusions that mantled her face and neck, the gentle heaving of
the bosom, the eye now and then lost in reverie, all betrayed the
soft tumult that was going on in her little heart.  The aunts were
continually hovering around her; for maiden aunts are apt to take
great interest in affairs of this nature: they were giving her a
world of staid counsel how to deport herself, what to say, and in
what manner to receive the expected lover.

The Baron was no less busied in preparations.  He had, in truth,
nothing exactly to do; but he was naturally a fuming, bustling little
man, and could not remain passive when all the world was in a hurry.
He worried from top to bottom of the castle, with an air of infinite
anxiety; he continually called the servants from their work to exhort
them to be diligent, and buzzed about every hall and chamber, as
idly, restless, and importunate as a bluebottle fly of a warm
summer's day.

In the meantime, the fatted calf had been killed; the forests had
rung with the clamor of the huntsmen; the kitchen was crowded with
good cheer; the cellars had yielded up whole oceans of _Rhein-wein_
and _Ferne-wein_, and even the great Heidelberg Tun had been laid
under contribution.  Everything was ready to receive the
distinguished guest with _Saus and Braus_ in the true spirit of
German hospitality--but the guest delayed to make his appearance.
Hour rolled after hour.  The sun that had poured his downward rays
upon the rich forests of the Odenwald, now just gleamed along the
summits of the mountains.  The Baron mounted the highest tower, and
strained his eyes in hopes of catching a distant sight of the Count
and his attendants.  Once he thought he beheld them; the sound of
horns came floating from the valley, prolonged by the mountain
echoes: a number of horsemen were seen far below, slowly advancing
along the road; but when they had nearly reached the foot of the
mountain they suddenly struck off in a different direction.  The last
ray of sunshine departed--the boats began to flit by in the
twilight--the road grew dimmer and dimmer to the view; and nothing
appeared stirring in it but now and then a peasant lagging homeward
from his labor.

While the old castle of Landshort was in this state of perplexity, a
very interesting scene was transacting in a different part of the
Odenwald.

The young Count Von Altenburg was tranquilly pursuing his route in
that sober jog-trot way in which a man travels toward matrimony when
his friends have taken all the trouble and uncertainty of courtship
off his hands, and a bride is waiting for him, as certainly as a
dinner, at the end of his journey.  He had encountered at Wurtzburg a
youthful companion in arms, with whom he had seen some service on the
frontiers: Herman Von Starkenfaust, one of the stoutest hands and
worthiest hearts of German chivalry, who was now returning from the
army.  His father's castle was not far distant from the old fortress
of Landshort, although a hereditary feud rendered the families
hostile and strangers to each other.

In the warm-hearted moment of recognition, the young friends related
all their past adventures and fortunes, and the Count gave the whole
history of his intended nuptials with a young lady whom he had never
seen, but of whose charms he had received the most enrapturing
descriptions.

As the route of the friends lay in the same direction, they agreed to
perform the rest of their journey together; and, that they might do
it more leisurely, set off from Wurtzburg at an early hour, the Count
having given directions for his retinue to follow and overtake him.

They beguiled their wayfaring with recollections of their military
scenes and adventures; but the Count was apt to be a little tedious,
now and then, about the reputed charms of his bride, and the felicity
that awaited him.

In this way they had entered among the mountains of the Odenwald, and
were traversing one of its most lonely and thickly wooded passes.  It
is well known that the forests of Germany have always been as much
infested with robbers as its castles by spectres; and, at this time,
the former were particularly numerous, from the hordes of disbanded
soldiers wandering about the country.  It will not appear
extraordinary, therefore, that the cavaliers were attacked by a gang
of these stragglers in the midst of the forest.  They defended
themselves with bravery, but were nearly overpowered when the Count's
retinue arrived to their assistance.  At sight of them the robbers
fled, but not until the Count had received a mortal wound.  He was
slowly and carefully conveyed back to the city of Wurtzburg, and a
friar summoned from a neighboring convent, who was famous for his
skill in administering to both soul and body.  But half of his skill
was superfluous; the moments of the unfortunate Count were numbered.

With his dying breath he entreated his friend to repair instantly to
the castle of Landshort, and explain the fatal cause of his not
keeping his appointment with his bride.  Though not the most ardent
of lovers, he was one of the most punctilious of men, and appeared
earnestly solicitous that this mission should be speedily and
courteously executed.  "Unless this is done," said he, "I shall not
sleep quietly in my grave!"  He repeated these last words with
peculiar solemnity.  A request, at a moment so impressive, admitted
no hesitation.  Starkenfaust endeavored to soothe him to calmness;
promised faithfully to execute his wish, and gave him his hand in
solemn pledge.  The dying man pressed it in acknowledgment, but soon
lapsed into delirium--raved about his bride--his engagements--his
plighted word; ordered his horse, that he might ride to the castle of
Landshort, and expired in the fancied act of vaulting into the saddle.

Starkenfaust bestowed a sigh and a soldier's tear on the untimely
fate of his comrade; and then pondered on the awkward mission he had
undertaken.  His heart was heavy, and his head perplexed; for he was
to present himself an unbidden guest among hostile people, and to
damp their festivity with tidings fatal to their hopes.  Still there
were certain whisperings of curiosity in his bosom to see this
far-famed beauty of Katzenellenbogen so cautiously shut up from the
world; for he was a passionate admirer of the sex, and there was a
dash of eccentricity and enterprise in his character that made him
fond of all singular adventure.

Previous to his departure, he made all due arrangements with the holy
fraternity of the convent for the funeral solemnities of his friend,
who was to be buried in the cathedral of Wurtzburg, near some of his
illustrious relatives; and the mourning retinue of the Count took
charge of his remains.

It is now high time that we should return to the ancient family of
Katzenellenbogen, who were impatient for their guest, and still more
for their dinner; and to the worthy little Baron, whom we left airing
himself on the watch-tower.

Night closed in, but still no guest arrived.  The Baron descended
from the tower in despair.  The banquet, which had been delayed from
hour to hour, could no longer be postponed.  The meats were already
overdone, the cook in an agony, and the whole household had the look
of a garrison that had been reduced by famine.  The Baron was obliged
reluctantly to give orders for the feast without the presence of the
guest.  All were seated at table, and just on the point of
commencing, when the sound of a horn from without the gate gave
notice of the approach of a stranger.  Another long blast filled the
old courts of the castle with its echoes, and was answered by the
warder from the walls.  The Baron hastened to receive his future
son-in-law.

The drawbridge had been let down, and the stranger was before the
gate.  He was a tall gallant cavalier, mounted on a black steed.  His
countenance was pale, but he had a beaming, romantic eye, and an air
of stately melancholy.  The Baron was a little mortified that he
should have come in this simple, solitary style.  His dignity for a
moment was ruffled, and he felt disposed to consider it a want of
proper respect for the important occasion, and the important family
with which he was to be connected.  He pacified himself, however,
with the conclusion that it must have been youthful impatience which
had induced him thus to spur on sooner than his attendants.

"I am sorry," said the stranger, "to break in upon you thus
unseasonably--"

Here the Baron interrupted him with a world of compliments and
greetings; for, to tell the truth, he prided himself upon his
courtesy and his eloquence.  The stranger attempted, once or twice,
to stem the torrent of words, but in vain; so he bowed his head and
suffered it to flow on.  By the time the Baron had come to a pause
they had reached the inner court of the castle; and the stranger was
again about to speak, when he was once more interrupted by the
appearance of the female part of the family, leading forth the
shrinking and blushing bride.  He gazed on her for a moment as one
entranced; it seemed as if his whole soul beamed forth in the gaze,
and rested upon that lovely form.  One of the maiden aunts whispered
something in her ear; she made an effort to speak; her moist blue eye
was timidly raised, gave a shy glance of inquiry on the stranger, and
was cast again to the ground.  The words died away; but there was a
sweet smile playing about her lips, and a soft dimpling of the cheek,
that showed her glance had not been unsatisfactory.  It was
impossible for a girl of the fond age of eighteen, highly predisposed
for love and matrimony, not to be pleased with so gallant a cavalier.

The late hour at which the guest had arrived left no time for parley.
The Baron was peremptory, and deferred all particular conversation
until the morning, and led the way to the untasted banquet.

It was served up in the great hall of the castle.  Around the walls
hung the hard-favored portraits of the heroes of the house of
Katzenellenbogen, and the trophies which they had gained in the field
and in the chase.  Hacked corselets, splintered jousting spears, and
tattered banners, were mingled with the spoils of sylvan warfare: the
jaws of the wolf, and the tusks of the boar, grinned horribly among
crossbows and battle-axes, and a huge pair of antlers branched
immediately over the head of the youthful bridegroom.

The cavalier took but little notice of the company or the
entertainment.  He scarcely tasted the banquet, but seemed absorbed
in admiration of his bride.  He conversed in a low tone, that could
not be overheard--for the language of love is never loud; but where
is the female ear so dull that it can not catch the softest whisper
of the lover?  There was a mingled tenderness and gravity in his
manner that appeared to have a powerful effect upon the young lady.
Her color came and went, as she listened with deep attention.  Now
and then she made some blushing reply, and when his eye was turned
away she would steal a sidelong glance at his romantic countenance,
and heave a gentle sigh of tender happiness.  It was evident that the
young couple were completely enamored.  The aunts, who were deeply
versed in the mysteries of the heart, declared that they had fallen
in love with each other at first sight.

The feast went on merrily, or at least noisily, for the guests were
all blessed with those keen appetites that attend upon light purses
and mountain air.  The Baron told his best and longest stories, and
never had he told them so well, or with such great effect.  If there
was anything marvelous, his auditors were lost in astonishment; and
if anything facetious, they were sure to laugh exactly in the right
place.  The Baron, it is true, like most great men, was too dignified
to utter any joke but a dull one: it was always enforced, however, by
a bumper of excellent Hoch-heimer; and even a dull joke, at one's own
table, served up with jolly old wine, is irresistible.  Many good
things were said by poorer and keener wits that would not bear
repeating, except on similar occasions; many sly speeches whispered
in ladies' ears that almost convulsed them with suppressed laughter;
and a song or two roared out by a poor, but merry and broad-faced
cousin of the Baron, that absolutely made the maiden aunts hold up
their fans.

Amid all this revelry, the stranger-guest maintained a most singular
and unseasonable gravity.  His countenance assumed a deeper cast of
dejection as the evening advanced, and, strange as it may appear,
even the Baron's jokes seemed only to render him the more melancholy.
At times he was lost in thought, and at times there was a perturbed
and restless wandering of the eye that bespoke a mind but ill at
ease.  His conversation with the bride became more and more earnest
and mysterious.  Lowering clouds began to steal over the fair
serenity of her brow, and tremors to run through her tender frame.

All this could not escape the notice of the company.  Their gaiety
was chilled by the unaccountable gloom of the bridegroom; their
spirits were infected; whispers and glances were interchanged,
accompanied by shrugs and dubious shakes of the head.  The song and
the laugh grew less and less frequent: there were dreary pauses in
the conversation, which were at length succeeded by wild tales, and
supernatural legends.  One dismal story produced another still more
dismal, and the Baron nearly frightened some of the ladies into
hysterics with the history of the goblin horseman that carried away
the fair Leonora--a dreadful, but true story, which has since been
put into excellent verse, and is read and believed by all the world.

The bridegroom listened to this tale with profound attention.  He
kept his eyes steadily fixed on the Baron, and, as the story drew to
a close, began gradually to rise from his seat, growing taller and
taller, until, in the Baron's entranced eye, he seemed almost to
tower into a giant.  The moment the tale was finished, he heaved a
deep sigh, and took a solemn farewell of the company.  They were all
amazement.  The Baron was perfectly thunderstruck.

"What! going to leave the castle at midnight?  Why, everything was
prepared for his reception; a chamber was ready for him if he wished
to retire."

The stranger shook his head mournfully and mysteriously: "I must lay
my head in a different chamber to-night!"

There was something in this reply, and the tone in which it was
uttered, that made the Baron's heart misgive him; but he rallied his
forces, and repeated his hospitable entreaties.  The stranger shook
his head silently, but positively, at every offer; and, waving his
farewell to the company, stalked slowly out of the hall.  The maiden
aunts were absolutely petrified--the bride hung her head, and a tear
stole to her eye.

The Baron followed the stranger to the great court of the castle,
where the black charger stood pawing the earth and snorting with
impatience.  When they had reached the portal, whose deep archway was
dimly lighted by a cresset, the stranger paused, and addressed the
Baron in a hollow tone of voice, which the vaulted roof rendered
still more sepulchral.  "Now that we are alone," said he, "I will
impart to you the reason of my going.  I have a solemn, an
indispensable engagement--"

"Why," said the Baron, "can not you send some one in your place?"

"It admits of no substitute--I must attend it in person--I must away
to Wurtzburg cathedral--"

"Ay," said the Baron, plucking up spirit, "but not until
to-morrow--to-morrow you shall take your bride there."

"No! no!" replied the stranger, with tenfold solemnity, "my
engagement is with no bride--the worms! the worms expect me!  I am a
dead man--I have been slain by robbers--my body lies at Wurtzburg--at
midnight I am to be buried--the grave is waiting for me--I must keep
my appointment!"

He sprang on his black charger, dashed over the drawbridge, and the
clattering of his horse's hoofs was lost in the whistling of the
night-blast.

The Baron returned to the hall in the utmost consternation, and
related what had passed.  Two ladies fainted outright; others
sickened at the idea of having banqueted with a spectre.  It was the
opinion of some that this might be the wild huntsman famous in German
legend.  Some talked of mountain sprites, of wood-demons, and of
other supernatural beings, with which the good people of Germany have
been so grievously harassed since time immemorial.  One of the poor
relations ventured to suggest that it might be some sportive evasion
of the young cavalier, and that the very gloominess of the caprice
seemed to accord with so melancholy a personage.  This, however, drew
on him the indignation of the whole company, and especially of the
Baron, who looked upon him as little better than an infidel; so that
he was fain to abjure his heresy as speedily as possible, and come
into the faith of the true believers.

But, whatever may have been the doubts entertained, they were
completely put to an end by the arrival, next day, of regular
missives confirming the intelligence of the young Count's murder, and
his interment in Wurtzburg cathedral.

The dismay at the castle may well be imagined.  The Baron shut
himself up in his chamber.  The guests who had come to rejoice with
him could not think of abandoning him in his distress.  They wandered
about the courts, or collected in groups in the hall, shaking their
heads and shrugging their shoulders at the troubles of so good a man;
and sat longer than ever at table, and ate and drank more stoutly
than ever, by way of keeping up their spirits.  But the situation of
the widowed bride was the most pitiable.  To have lost a husband
before she had even embraced him--and such a husband! if the very
spectre could be so gracious and noble, what must have been the
living man?  She filled the house with lamentations.

On the night of the second day of her widowhood, she had retired to
her chamber, accompanied by one of her aunts, who insisted on
sleeping with her.  The aunt, who was one of the best tellers of
ghost stories in all Germany, had just been recounting one of her
longest, and had fallen asleep in the very midst of it.  The chamber
was remote, and overlooked a small garden.  The niece lay pensively
gazing at the beams of the rising moon, as they trembled on the
leaves of an aspen tree before the lattice.  The castle clock had
just tolled midnight, when a soft strain of music stole up from the
garden.  She rose hastily from her bed and stepped lightly to the
window.  A tall figure stood among the shadows of the trees.  As it
raised its head, a beam of moonlight fell upon the countenance.
Heaven and earth! she beheld the Spectre Bridegroom!  A loud shriek
at that moment burst upon her ear, and her aunt, who had been
awakened by the music, and had followed her silently to the window,
fell into her arms.  When she looked again, the spectre had
disappeared.

Of the two females, the aunt now required the most soothing, for she
was perfectly beside herself with terror.  As to the young lady,
there was something, even in the spectre of her lover, that seemed
endearing.  There was still the semblance of manly beauty; and though
the shadow of a man is but little calculated to satisfy the
affections of a love-sick girl, yet, where the substance is not to be
had, even that is consoling.  The aunt declared she would never sleep
in that chamber again; the niece, for once, was refractory, and
declared as strongly that she would sleep in no other in the castle:
the consequence was that she had to sleep in it alone; but she drew a
promise from her aunt not to relate the story of the spectre, lest
she should be denied the only melancholy pleasure left her on
earth--that of inhabiting the chamber over which the guardian shade
of her lover kept its nightly vigils.

How long the good old lady would have observed this promise is
uncertain, for she dearly loved to talk of the marvelous, and there
is a triumph in being the first to tell a frightful story; it is,
however, still quoted in the neighborhood, as a memorable instance of
female secrecy, that she kept it to herself for a whole week; when
she was suddenly absolved from all further restraint by intelligence
brought to the breakfast-table one morning that the young lady was
not to be found.  Her room was empty--the bed had not been slept
in--the window was open--and the bird had flown!

The astonishment and concern with which the intelligence was received
can only be imagined by those who have witnessed the agitation which
the mishaps of a great man cause among his friends.  Even the poor
relations paused for a moment from the indefatigable labors of the
trencher; when the aunt, who had at first been struck speechless,
wrung her hands and shrieked out, "The goblin! the goblin!  She's
carried away by the goblin!"

In a few words she related the fearful scene of the garden, and
concluded that the spectre must have carried off his bride.  Two of
the domestics corroborated the opinion, for they had heard the
clattering of a horse's hoofs down the mountain about midnight, and
had no doubt that it was the spectre on his black charger, bearing
her away to the tomb.  All present were struck with the direful
probability; for events of the kind are extremely common in Germany,
as many well-authenticated histories bear witness.

What a lamentable situation was that of the poor Baron!  What a
heartrending dilemma for a fond father, and a member of the great
family of Katzenellenbogen!  His only daughter had either been rapt
away to the grave, or he was to have some wood-demon for a
son-in-law, and, perchance, a troop of goblin grandchildren.  As
usual, he was completely bewildered, and all the castle in an uproar.
The men were ordered to take horse and scour every road and path and
glen of the Odenwald.  The Baron himself had just drawn on his
jack-boots, girded on his sword, and was about to mount his steed to
sally forth on the doubtful quest, when he was brought to a pause by
a new apparition.  A lady was seen approaching the castle, mounted on
a palfrey attended by a cavalier on horseback.  She galloped up to
the gate, sprang from her horse, and falling at the Baron's feet,
embraced his knees.  It was his lost daughter, and her companion--the
Spectre Bridegroom!  The Baron was astounded.  He looked at his
daughter, then at the spectre, and almost doubted the evidence of his
senses.  The latter, too, was wonderfully improved in his appearance,
since his visit to the world of spirits.  His dress was splendid, and
set off a noble figure of manly symmetry.  He was no longer pale and
melancholy.  His fine countenance was flushed with the glow of youth,
and joy rioted in his large dark eye.

The mystery was soon cleared up.  The cavalier (for, in truth, as you
must have known all the while, he was no goblin) announced himself as
Sir Herman Von Starkenfaust.  He related his adventure with the young
Count.  He told how he had hastened to the castle to deliver the
unwelcome tidings, but that the eloquence of the Baron had
interrupted him in every attempt to tell his tale.  How the sight of
the bride had completely captivated him, and that to pass a few hours
near her he had tacitly suffered the mistake to continue.  How he had
been sorely perplexed in what way to make a decent retreat, until the
Baron's goblin stories had suggested his eccentric exit.  How,
fearing the feudal hostility of the family, he had repeated his
visits by stealth--had haunted the garden beneath the young lady's
window--had wooed--had won--had borne away in triumph--and, in a
word, had wedded the fair.

Under any other circumstances the Baron would have been inflexible,
for he was tenacious of paternal authority and devoutly obstinate in
all family feuds; but he loved his daughter; he had lamented her as
lost; he rejoiced to find her still alive; and, though her husband
was of a hostile house, yet, thank Heaven, he was not a goblin.
There was something, it must be acknowledged, that did not exactly
accord with his notions of strict veracity, in the joke the knight
had passed upon him of his being a dead man; but several old friends
present, who had served in the wars, assured him that every stratagem
was excusable in love, and that the cavalier was entitled to especial
privilege, having lately served as a trooper.

Matters, therefore, were happily arranged.  The Baron pardoned the
young couple on the spot.  The revels at the castle were resumed.
The poor relations overwhelmed this new member of the family with
loving-kindness; he was so gallant, so generous--and so rich.  The
aunts, it is true, were somewhat scandalized that their system of
strict seclusion, and passive obedience, should be so badly
exemplified, but attributed it all to their negligence in not having
the windows grated.  One of them was particularly mortified at having
her marvelous story marred, and that the only spectre she had ever
seen should turn out a counterfeit; but the niece seemed perfectly
happy at having found him substantial flesh and blood--and so the
story ends.




THE MYSTERIOUS SKETCH

BY ERCKMANN--CHATRIAN

_Emile Erckmann (born 1822, died 1899) and Alexandre Chatrian (born
1826, died 1890), natives of Alsace-Lorraine, formed a literary
partnership in 1847 and wrote many charming novels and plays which
attained a great vogue.  These, appearing under the signature of
Erckmann-Chatrian, were supposed to be the productions of a single
writer until 1863, when the collaboration was announced.  It is said
that their first stories were rejected by all the newspapers of
Paris._

_"The Mysterious Sketch" is from "Les Contes Fantastiques."_



THE MYSTERIOUS SKETCH

By ERCKMANN--CHATRIAN


I

Opposite the chapel of Saint Sebalt in Nuremberg, at the corner of
Trabaus Street, there stands a little tavern, tall and narrow, with a
toothed gable and dusty windows, whose roof is surmounted by a
plaster Virgin.  It was there that I spent the unhappiest days of my
life.  I had gone to Nuremberg to study the old German masters; but
in default of ready money, I had to paint portraits--and such
portraits!  Fat old women with their cats on their laps, big-wigged
aldermen, burgomasters in three-cornered hats--all horribly bright
with ochre and vermilion.  From portraits I descended to sketches,
and from sketches to silhouettes.

Nothing is more annoying than to have your landlord come to you every
day with pinched lips, shrill voice, and impudent manner to say:
"Well, sir, how soon are you going to pay me?  Do you know how much
your bill is?  No; that doesn't worry you!  You eat, drink, and sleep
calmly enough.  God feeds the sparrows.  Your bill now amounts to two
hundred florins and ten kreutzers--it is not worth talking about."

Those who have not heard any one talk in this way can form no idea of
it; love of art, imagination, and the sacred enthusiasm for the
beautiful are blasted by the breath of such an attack.  You become
awkward and timid; all your energy evaporates, as well as your
feeling of personal dignity, and you bow respectfully at a distance
to the burgomaster Schneegans.

One night, not having a sou, as usual, and threatened with
imprisonment by this worthy Mister Rap, I determined to make him a
bankrupt by cutting my throat.  Seated on my narrow bed, opposite the
window, in this agreeable mood, I gave myself up to a thousand
philosophical reflections, more or less comforting.

"What is man?" I asked myself.  "An omnivorous animal; his jaws,
provided with canines, incisors, and molars, prove it.  The canines
are made to tear meat; the incisors to bite fruits; and the molars to
masticate, grind and triturate animal and vegetable substances that
are pleasant to smell and to taste.  But when he has nothing to
masticate, this being is an absurdity in Nature, a superfluity, a
fifth wheel to the coach."

Such were my reflections.  I dared not open my razor for fear that
the invincible force of my logic would inspire me with the courage to
make an end of it all.  After having argued so finely, I blew out my
candle, postponing the sequel till the morrow.

That abominable Rap had completely stupefied me.  I could do nothing
but silhouettes, and my sole desire was to have some money to rid
myself of his odious presence.  But on this night a singular change
came over my mind.  I awoke about one o'clock--I lit my lamp, and,
enveloping myself in my gray gabardine, I drew upon the paper a rapid
sketch after the Dutch school--something strange and bizarre, which
had not the slightest resemblance to my ordinary conceptions.

Imagine a dreary courtyard enclosed by high dilapidated walls.  These
walls are furnished with hooks, seven or eight feet from the ground.
You see, at a glance, that it is a butchery.

On the left, there extends a lattice structure; you perceive through
it a quartered beef suspended from the roof by enormous pulleys.
Great pools of blood run over the flagstones and unite in a ditch
full of refuse.

The light falls from above, between the chimneys where the
weathercocks stand out from a bit of the sky the size of your hand,
and the roofs of the neighboring houses throw bold shadows from story
to story.

At the back of this place is a shed, beneath the shed a pile of wood,
and upon the pile of wood some ladders, a few bundles of straw, some
coils of rope, a chicken-coop, and an old dilapidated rabbit-hutch.

How did these heterogeneous details suggest themselves to my
imagination?  I don't know; I had no reminiscences, and yet every
stroke of the pencil seemed the result of observation, and strange
because it was all so true.  Nothing was lacking.

But on the right, one corner of the sketch remained a blank.  I did
not know what to put there....  Something suddenly seemed to writhe
there, to move!  Then I saw a foot, the sole of a foot.
Notwithstanding this improbable position, I followed my inspiration
without reference to my own criticism.  This foot was joined to a
leg--over this leg, stretched out with effort, there soon floated the
skirt of a dress.  In short, there appeared by degrees, an old woman,
pale, disheveled, and wasted, thrown down at the side of a well, and
struggling to free herself from a hand that clutched at her throat.

It was a murder scene that I was drawing.  The pencil fell from my
hand.

This woman, in the boldest attitude, with her thighs bent on the curb
of the well, her face contracted by terror, and her two hands
grasping the murderer's arm, frightened me.  I could not look at her.
But the man--he, the person to whom that arm belonged--I could not
see him.  It was impossible for me to finish the sketch.

"I am tired," I said, my forehead dripping with perspiration; "there
is only this figure to do; I will finish it to-morrow.  It will be
easy then."

And I went to bed again, thoroughly frightened by my vision.

The next morning, I got up very early.  I was dressing in order to
resume my interrupted work, when two little knocks were heard on my
door.

"Come in!"

The door opened.  An old man, tall, thin, and dressed in black,
appeared on the threshold.  This man's face, his eyes set close
together and his large nose like the beak of an eagle, surmounted by
a high bony forehead, had something severe about it.  He bowed to me
gravely.

"Mister Christian Vénius, the painter?" said he.

"That is my name, sir."

He bowed again, adding:

"The Baron Frederick Van Spreckdal."

The appearance of the rich amateur, Van Spreckdal, judge of the
criminal court, in my poor lodging, greatly disturbed me.  I could
not help throwing a stealthy glance at my old worm-eaten furniture,
my damp hangings and my dusty floor.  I felt humiliated by such
dilapidation; but Van Spreckdal did not seem to take any account of
these details; and sitting down at my little table:

"Mister Vénius," he resumed, "I come--"  But at this instant his
glance fell upon the unfinished sketch--he did not finish his phrase.

I was sitting on the edge of my little bed; and the sudden attention
that this personage bestowed upon one of my productions made my heart
beat with an indefinable apprehension.

At the end of a minute, Van Spreckdal lifted his head:

"Are you the author of that sketch?" he asked me with an intent look.

"Yes, sir."

"What is the price of it?"

"I never sell my sketches.  It is the plan for a picture."

"Ah!" said he, picking up the paper with the tips of his long yellow
fingers.

He took a lens from his waistcoat pocket and began to study the
design in silence.

The sun was now shining obliquely into the garret.  Van Spreckdal
never said a word; the hook of his immense nose increased, his heavy
eyebrows contracted, and his long pointed chin took a turn upward,
making a thousand little wrinkles in his long, thin cheeks.  The
silence was so profound that I could distinctly hear the plaintive
buzzing of a fly that had been caught in a spider's web.

"And the dimensions of this picture, Mister Vénius," he said without
looking at me.

"Three feet by four."

"The price?"

"Fifty ducats."

Van Spreckdal laid the sketch on the table, and drew from his pocket
a large purse of green silk shaped like a pear; he drew the rings of
it--

"Fifty ducats," said he, "here they are."

I was simply dazzled.

The Baron rose and bowed to me, and I heard his big ivory-headed cane
resounding on each step until he reached the bottom of the stairs.
Then, recovering from my stupor, I suddenly remembered that I had not
thanked him, and I flew down the five flights like lightning; but
when I reached the bottom, I looked to the right and left; the street
was deserted.

"Well!" I said, "this is strange."

And I went upstairs again all out of breath.



II

The surprising way in which Van Spreckdal had appeared to me threw me
into a deep wonderment.  "Yesterday," I said to myself, as I
contemplated the pile of ducats glittering in the sun, "yesterday I
formed the wicked intention of cutting my throat, all for the want of
a few miserable florins, and now to-day Fortune has showered them
from the clouds.  Indeed it was fortunate that I did not open my
razor; and, if the same temptation ever comes to me again, I will
take care to wait until the morrow."

After making these judicious reflections, I sat down to finish the
sketch; four strokes of the pencil and it would be finished.  But
here an incomprehensible difficulty awaited me.  It was impossible
for me to make those four sweeps of the pencil; I had lost the thread
of my inspiration, and the mysterious personage no longer stood out
in my brain.  I tried in vain to evoke him, to sketch him, and to
recover him; he no longer accorded with the surroundings than with a
figure by Raphael in a Teniers inn-kitchen.  I broke out into a
profuse perspiration.

At this moment, Rap opened the door without knocking, according to
his praiseworthy custom.  His eyes fell upon my pile of ducats and in
a shrill voice he cried:

"Eh! eh! so I catch you.  Will you still persist in telling me, Mr.
Painter, that you have no money?"

And his hooked fingers advanced with that nervous trembling that the
sight of gold always produces in a miser.

For a few seconds I was stupefied.

The memory of all the indignities that this individual had inflicted
upon me, his covetous look, and his impudent smile exasperated me.
With a single bound, I caught hold of him, and pushed him out of the
room, slamming the door in his face.

This was done with the crack and rapidity of a spring snuff-box.

But from outside the old usurer screamed like an eagle:

"My money, you thief, my money!"

The lodgers come out of their rooms, asking:

"What is the matter?  What has happened?"

I opened the door suddenly and quickly gave Mister Rap a kick in the
spine that sent him rolling down more than twenty steps.

"That's what's the matter!" I cried, quite beside myself.  Then I
shut the door and bolted it, while bursts of laughter from the
neighbors greeted Mister Rap in the passage.

I was satisfied with myself; I rubbed my hands together.  This
adventure had put new life into me; I resumed my work, and was about
to finish the sketch when I heard an unusual noise.

Butts of muskets were grounded on the pavement.  I looked out of my
window and saw three soldiers in full uniform with grounded arms in
front of my door.

I said to myself in my terror: "Can it be that that scoundrel of a
Rap has had any bones broken?"

And here is the strange peculiarity of the human mind: I, who the
night before had wanted to cut my own throat, shook from head to
foot, thinking that I might well be hanged if Rap were dead.

The stairway was filled with confused noises.  It was an ascending
flood of heavy footsteps, clanking arms, and short syllables.

Suddenly somebody tried to open my door.  It was shut.

Then there was a general clamor.

"In the name of the law--open!"

I arose, trembling and weak in the knees.

"Open!" the same voice repeated.

I thought to escape over the roofs; but I had hardly put my head out
of the little snuff-box window, when I drew back, seized with
vertigo.  I saw in a flash all the windows below with their shining
panes, their flower-pots, their birdcages, and their gratings.
Lower, the balcony; still lower, the street lamp; still lower again,
the sign of the "Red Cask" framed in iron-work; and, finally, three
glittering bayonets, only awaiting my fall to run me through the body
from the sole of my foot to the crown of my head.  On the roof of the
opposite house a tortoise-shell cat was crouching behind a chimney,
watching a band of sparrows fighting and scolding in the gutter.

One can not imagine to what clearness, intensity, and rapidity the
human eye acquires when stimulated by fear.

At the third summons I heard:

"Open, or we shall force it!"

Seeing that flight was impossible, I staggered to the door and drew
the bolt.

Two hands immediately fell upon my collar.  A dumpy, little man,
smelling of wine, said:

"I arrest you!"

He wore a bottle-green redingote, buttoned to the chin, and a
stovepipe hat.  He had large brown whiskers, rings on every finger,
and was named Passauf.

He was the chief of police.

Five bull-dogs with flat caps, noses like pistols, and lower jaws
turning upward, observed me from outside.

"What do you want?" I asked Passauf.

"Come downstairs," he cried roughly, as he gave a sign to one of his
men to seize me.

This man took hold of me, more dead than alive, while several other
men turned my room upside down.

I went downstairs supported by the arms like a person in the last
stages of consumption--with hair disheveled and stumbling at every
step.

They thrust me into a cab between two strong fellows, who charitably
let me see the ends of their clubs, held to their wrists by a leather
string--and then the carriage started off.

I heard behind us the feet of all the urchins of the town.

"What have I done?" I asked one of my keepers.

He looked at the other with a strange smile and said:

"Hans--he asks what he has done!"

That smile froze my blood.

Soon a deep shadow enveloped the carriage; the horses' hoofs
resounded under an archway.  We were entering the Raspelhaus.  Of
this place one might say:

  "Dans cet antre,
  Je vois fort bien comme l'on entre,
  Et ne vois point comme on en sort."


All is not rose-colored in this world; from the claws of Rap I fell
into a dungeon, from which very few poor devils have a chance to
escape.

Large dark courtyards and rows of windows like a hospital, and
furnished with gratings; not a sprig of verdure, not a festoon of
ivy, not even a weathercock in perspective--such was my new lodging.
It was enough to make one tear his hair out by the roots.

The police officers, accompanied by the jailer, took me temporarily
to a lock-up.

The jailer, if I remember rightly, was named Kasper Schlüssel; with
his gray, woolen cap, his pipe between his teeth, and his bunch of
keys at his belt, he reminded me of the Owl-God of the Caribs.  He
had the same golden yellow eyes, that see in the dark, a nose like a
comma, and a neck that was sunk between the shoulders.

Schlüssel shut me up as calmly as one locks up his socks in a
cupboard, while thinking of something else.  As for me, I stood for
more than ten minutes with my hands behind my back and my head bowed.
At the end of that time I made the following reflection: "When
falling, Rap cried out, 'I am assassinated,' but he did not say by
whom.  I will say it was my neighbor, the old merchant with the
spectacles: he will be hanged in my place."

This idea comforted my heart, and I drew a long breath.  Then I
looked about my prison.  It seemed to have been newly whitewashed,
and the walls were bare of designs, except in one corner, where a
gallows had been crudely sketched by my predecessor.  The light was
admitted through a bull's-eye about nine or ten feet from the floor;
the furniture consisted of a bundle of straw and a tub.

I sat down upon the straw with my hands around my knees in deep
despondency.  It was with great difficulty that I could think
clearly; but suddenly imagining that Rap, before dying, had denounced
me, my legs began to tingle, and I jumped up coughing, as if the
hempen cord were already tightening around my neck.

At the same moment, I heard Schlüssel walking down the corridor; he
opened the lock-up, and told me to follow him.  He was still
accompanied by the two officers, so I fell into step resolutely.

We walked down long galleries, lighted at intervals by small windows
from within.  Behind a grating I saw the famous Jic-Jack, who was
going to be executed on the morrow.  He had on a straitjacket and
sang out in a raucous voice:

"_Je suis le roi de ces montagnes._"

Seeing me, he called out:

"Eh! comrade!  I'll keep a place for you at my right."

The two police officers and the Owl-God looked at each other and
smiled, while I felt the goose-flesh creep down the whole length of
my back.



III

Schlüssel shoved me into a large and very dreary hall, with benches
arranged in a semicircle.  The appearance of this deserted hall, with
its two high grated windows, and its Christ carved in old brown oak
with His arms extended and His head sorrowfully inclined upon His
shoulder, inspired me with I do not know what kind of religious fear
that accorded with my actual situation.

All my ideas of false accusation disappeared, and my lips tremblingly
murmured a prayer.

I had not prayed for a long time; but misfortune always brings us to
thoughts of submission.  Man is so little in himself!

Opposite me, on an elevated seat, two men were sitting, with their
backs to the light, and consequently their faces were in shadow.
However, I recognized Van Spreckdal by his acquiline profile,
illuminated by an oblique reflection from the window.  The other
person was fat, he had round, chubby cheeks and short hands, and he
wore a robe, like Van Spreckdal.

Below was the clerk of the court, Conrad; he was writing at a low
table and was tickling the tip of his ear with the feather-end of his
pen.  When I entered, he stopped to look at me curiously.

They made me sit down, and Van Spreckdal, raising his voice, said to
me:

"Christian Vénius, where did you get this sketch?"

He showed me the nocturnal sketch which was then in his possession.
It was handed to me.  After having examined it, I replied:

"I am the author of it."

A long silence followed; the clerk of the court, Conrad, wrote down
my reply.  I heard his pen scratch over the paper, and I thought:
"Why did they ask me that question?  That has nothing to do with the
kick I gave Rap in the back."

"You are the author of it?" asked Van Spreckdal.  "What is the
subject?"

"It is a subject of pure fancy."

"You have not copied the details from some spot?"

"No, sir; I imagined it all."

"Accused Christian," said the judge in a severe tone, "I ask you to
reflect.  Do not lie."

"I have spoken the truth."

"Write that down, clerk," said Van Spreckdal.

The pen scratched again.

"And this woman," continued the judge--"this woman who is being
murdered at the side of the well--did you imagine her also?"

"Certainly."

"You have never seen her?"

"Never."

Van Spreckdal rose indignantly; then, sitting down again, he seemed
to consult his companion in a low voice.

These two dark profiles silhouetted against the brightness of the
window, and the three men standing behind me, the silence in the
hall--everything made me shiver.

"What do you want with me?  What have I done?" I murmured.

Suddenly Van Spreckdal said to my guardians:

"You can take the prisoner back to the carriage; we will go to
Metzerstrasse."

Then, addressing me:

"Christian Vénius," he cried, "you are in a deplorable situation.
Collect your thoughts and remember that if the law of men is
inflexible, there still remains for you the mercy of God.  This you
can merit by confessing your crime."

These words stunned me like a blow from a hammer.  I fell back with
extended arms, crying:

"Ah! what a terrible dream!"

And I fainted.

When I regained consciousness, the carriage was rolling slowly down
the street; another one preceded us.  The two officers were always
with me.  One of them on the way offered a pinch of snuff to his
companion; mechanically I reached out my hand toward the snuff-box,
but he withdrew it quickly.

My cheeks reddened with shame, and I turned away my head to conceal
my emotion.

"If you look outside," said the man with the snuff-box, "we shall be
obliged to put handcuffs on you."

"May the devil strangle you, you infernal scoundrel!" I said to
myself.  And as the carriage now stopped, one of them got out, while
the other held me by the collar; then, seeing that his comrade was
ready to receive me, he pushed me rudely to him.

These infinite precautions to hold possession of my person boded no
good; but I was far from predicting the seriousness of the accusation
that hung over my head until an alarming circumstance opened my eyes
and threw me into despair.

They pushed me along a low alley, the pavement of which was unequal
and broken; along the wall there ran a yellowish ooze, exhaling a
fetid odor.  I walked down this dark place with the two men behind
me.  A little further there appeared the chiaroscuro of an interior
courtyard.

I grew more and more terror-stricken as I advanced.  It was no
natural feeling: it was a poignant anxiety, outside of nature--like
the nightmare.  I recoiled instinctively at each step.

"Go on!" cried one of the policemen, laying his hand on my shoulder;
"go on!"

But what was my astonishment when, at the end of the passage, I saw
the courtyard that I had drawn the night before, with its walls
furnished with hooks, its rubbish-heap of old iron, its
chicken-coops, and its rabbit-hutch.  Not a dormer window, high or
low, not a broken pane, not the slightest detail had been omitted.

I was thunderstruck by this strange revelation.

Near the well were the two judges, Van Spreckdal and Richter.  At
their feet lay the old woman extended on her back, her long, thin,
gray hair, her blue face, her eyes wide open, and her tongue between
her teeth.

It was a horrible spectacle!

"Well," said Van Spreckdal, with solemn accents, "what have you to
say?"

I did not reply.

"Do you remember having thrown this woman, Theresa Becker, into this
well, after having strangled her to rob her of her money."

"No," I cried, "no!  I do not know this woman; I never saw her
before.  May God help me!"

"That will do," he replied in a dry voice.  And without saying
another word he went out with his companion.

The officers now believed they had best put handcuffs on me.  They
took me back to the Raspelhaus, in a state of profound stupidity.  I
did not know what to think; my conscience itself troubled me; I even
asked myself if I really had murdered the old woman!

In the eyes of the officers I was condemned.

I will not tell you of my emotions that night in the Raspelhaus,
when, seated on my straw bed with the window opposite me and the
gallows in perspective, I heard the watchmen cry in the silence of
the night: "Sleep, people of Nuremberg; the Lord watches over you.
One o'clock!  Two o'clock!  Three o'clock!"

Every one may form his own idea of such a night.  There is a fine
saying that it is better to be hanged innocent than guilty.  For the
soul, yes; but for the body, it makes no difference; on the contrary,
it kicks, it curses its lot, it tries to escape, knowing well enough
that its rôle ends with the rope.  Add to this, that it repents not
having sufficiently enjoyed life and at having listened to the soul
when it preached abstinence.

"Ah! if I had only known!" it cried, "you would not have led me about
by a string with your big words, your beautiful phrases, and your
magnificent sentences!  You would not have allured me with your fine
promises.  I should have had many happy moments that are now lost
forever.  Everything is over!  You said to me: 'Control your
passions.'  Very well!  I did control them.  Here I am now! they are
going to hang me, and you--later they will speak of you as a sublime
soul, a stoical soul, a martyr to the errors of Justice.  They will
never think about me!"

Such were the sad reflections of my poor body.

Day broke; at first, dull and undecided, it threw an uncertain light
on my bull's-eye window with its cross-bars; then it blazed against
the wall at the back.  Outside the street became lively.  This was a
market-day; it was Friday.  I heard the vegetable wagons pass and
also the country people with their baskets.  Some chickens cackled in
their coops in passing and some butter sellers chattered together.
The market opposite opened, and they began to arrange the stalls.

Finally, it was broad daylight and the vast murmur of the increasing
crowd, housekeepers who assembled with baskets on their arms, coming
and going, discussing and marketing, told me that it was eight
o'clock.

With the light, my heart gained a little courage.  Some of my black
thoughts disappeared.  I desired to see what was going on outside.

Other prisoners before me had managed to climb up to the bull's-eye;
they had dug some holes in the wall to mount more easily.  I climbed
in my turn, and, when seated in the oval edge of the window, with my
legs bent and my head bowed, I could see the crowd, and all the life
and movement.  Tears ran freely down my cheeks.  I thought no longer
of suicide--I experienced a need to live and breathe, which was
really extraordinary.

"Ah!" I said, "to live what happiness!  Let them harness me to a
wheelbarrow--let them put a ball and chain around my leg--nothing
matters if I may only live!"

The old market, with its roof shaped like an extinguisher, supported
on heavy pillars, made a superb picture: old women seated before
their panniers of vegetables, their cages of poultry and their
baskets of eggs; behind them the Jews, dealers in old clothes, their
faces the color of old boxwood; butchers with bare arms, cutting up
meat on their stalls; countrymen, with large hats on the backs of
their heads, calm and grave with their hands behind their backs and
resting on their sticks of hollywood, and tranquilly smoking their
pipes.  Then the tumult and noise of the crowd--those screaming,
shrill, grave, high, and short words--those expressive
gestures--those sudden attitudes that show from a distance the
progress of a discussion and depict so well the character of the
individual--in short, all this captivated my mind, and
notwithstanding my sad condition, I felt happy to be still of the
world.

Now, while I looked about in this manner, a man--a butcher--passed,
inclining forward and carrying an enormous quarter of beef on his
shoulders; his arms were bare, his elbows were raised upward and his
head was bent under them.  His long hair, like that of Salvator's
Sicambrian, hid his face from me; and yet, at the first glance, I
trembled.

"It is he!" I said.

All the blood in my body rushed to my heart.  I got down from the
window trembling to the ends of my fingers, feeling my cheeks quiver,
and the pallor spread over my face, stammering in a choked voice:

"It is he! he is there--there--and I, I have to die to expiate his
crime.  Oh, God! what shall I do?  What shall I do?"

A sudden idea, an inspiration from Heaven, flashed across my mind.  I
put my hand in the pocket of my coat--my box of crayons was there!

Then rushing to the wall, I began to trace the scene of the murder
with superhuman energy.  No uncertainty, no hesitation!  I knew the
man!  I had seen him!  He was there before me!

At ten o'clock the jailer came to my cell.  His owl-like
impassibility gave place to admiration.

"Is it possible?" he cried, standing at the threshold.

"Go, bring me my judges," I said to him, pursuing my work with an
increasing exultation.

Schlüssel answered:

"They are waiting for you in the trial-room."

"I wish to make a revelation," I cried, as I put the finishing
touches to the mysterious personage.

He lived; he was frightful to see.  His full-faced figure,
foreshortened upon the wall, stood out from the white background with
an astonishing vitality.

The jailer went away.

A few minutes afterward the two judges appeared.  They were
stupefied.  I, trembling, with extended hand, said to them:

"There is the murderer!"

After a few moments of silence, Van Spreckdal asked me:

"What is his name?"

"I don't know; but he is at this moment in the market; he is cutting
up meat in the third stall to the left as you enter from Trabaus
Street."

"What do you think?" said he, leaning toward his colleague.

"Send for the man," he replied in a grave tone.

Several officers retained in the corridor obeyed this order.  The
judges stood, examining the sketch.  As for me, I had dropped on my
bed of straw, my head between my knees, perfectly exhausted.

Soon steps were heard echoing under the archway.  Those who have
never awaited the hour of deliverance and counted the minutes, which
seem like centuries--those who have never experienced the sharp
emotions of outrage, terror, hope, and doubt--can have no conception
of the inward chills that I experienced at that moment.  I should
have distinguished the step of the murderer, walking between the
guards, among a thousand others.  They approached.  The judges
themselves seemed moved.  I raised up my head, my heart feeling as if
an iron hand had clutched it, and I fixed my eyes upon the closed
door.  It opened.  The man entered.  His cheeks were red and swollen,
the muscles in his large contracted jaws twitched as far as his ears,
and his little restless eyes, yellow like a wolf's, gleamed beneath
his heavy yellowish red eyebrows.

Van Spreckdal showed him the sketch in silence.

Then that murderous man, with the large shoulders, having looked,
grew pale--then, giving a roar which thrilled us all with terror, he
waved his enormous arms, and jumped backward to overthrow the guards.
There was a terrible struggle in the corridor; you could hear nothing
but the panting breathing of the butcher, his muttered imprecations,
and the short words and the shuffling feet of the guard, upon the
flagstones.

This lasted only about a minute.

Finally the assassin reentered, with his head hanging down, his eyes
bloodshot, and his hands fastened behind his back.  He looked again
at the picture of the murder; he seemed to reflect, and then, in a
low voice, as if talking to himself:

"Who could have seen me," he said, "at midnight?"

I was saved!

. . . . . . . . . .

Many years have passed since that terrible adventure.  Thank Heaven!
I make silhouettes no longer, nor portraits of burgomasters.  Through
hard work and perseverance, I have conquered my place in the world,
and I earn my living honorably by painting works of art--the sole
end, in my opinion, to which a true artist should aspire.  But the
memory of that nocturnal sketch has always remained in my mind.
Sometimes, in the midst of work, the thought of it recurs.  Then I
lay down my palette and dream for hours.

How could a crime committed by a man that I did not know--at a place
that I had never seen--have been reproduced by my pencil, in all its
smallest details?

Was it chance?  No!  And moreover, what is chance but the effect of a
cause of which we are ignorant?

Was Schiller right when he said: "The immortal soul does not
participate in the weaknesses of matter; during the sleep of the
body, it spreads its radiant wings and travels, God knows where!
What it then does, no one can say, but inspiration sometimes betrays
the secret of its nocturnal wanderings."

Who knows?  Nature is more audacious in her realities than man in his
most fantastic imaginings.




MR. HIGGINBOTHAM'S CATASTROPHE

BY NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE

_Here is a story, one of the "Twice-Told Tales," the subject of which
might well have been selected for treatment by Poe.  In his hands,
how different the result would have been; how much more physical and
poignant, how much less spiritual and charming!_

_The real difference in the two writers is not so much a conflict of
artistic methods as it is a difference of moral make-up.  Hawthorne,
the son of a Salem sea captain, was descended from the grimmest
Puritans; Poe was the son of an actor._



MR. HIGGINBOTHAM'S CATASTROPHE

By NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE

A young fellow, a tobacco-pedler by trade, was on his way from
Morristown, where he had dealt largely with the Deacon of the Shaker
settlement, to the village of Parker's Falls, on Salmon River.  He
had a neat little cart, painted green, with a box of cigars depicted
on each side-panel, and an Indian chief, holding a pipe and a golden
tobacco-stalk, on the rear.  The pedler drove a smart little mare,
and was a young man of excellent character, keen at a bargain, but
none the worse liked by the Yankees; who, as I have heard them say,
would rather be shaved with a sharp razor than a dull one.
Especially was he beloved by the pretty girls along the Connecticut,
whose favor he used to court by presents of the best smoking tobacco
in his stock; knowing well that the country lasses of New England are
generally great performers on pipes.  Moreover, as will be seen in
the course of my story, the pedler was inquisitive, and something of
a tattler, always itching to hear the news, and anxious to tell it
again.

After an early breakfast at Morristown, the tobacco-pedler, whose
name was Dominicus Pike, had traveled seven miles through a solitary
piece of woods, without speaking a word to anybody but himself and
his little gray mare.  It being nearly seven o'clock, he was as eager
to hold a morning gossip as a city shopkeeper to read the morning
paper.  An opportunity seemed at hand, when, after lighting a cigar
with a sun-glass, he looked up and perceived a man coming over the
brow of the hill, at the foot of which the pedler had stopped his
green cart.  Dominicus watched him as he descended, and noticed that
he carried a bundle over his shoulder on the end of a stick, and
traveled with a weary, yet determined pace.  He did not look as if he
had started in the freshness of the morning, but had footed it all
night, and meant to do the same all day.

"Good-morning, mister," said Dominicus, when within speaking
distance.  "You go a pretty good jog.  What's the latest news at
Parker's Falls?"

The man pulled the broad brim of a gray hat over his eyes, and
answered, rather sullenly, that he did not come from Parker's Falls,
which, as being the limit of his own day's journey, the pedler had
naturally mentioned in his inquiry.

"Well, then," rejoined Dominicus Pike, "let's have the latest news
where you did come from.  I'm not particular about Parker's Falls.
Any place will answer."

Being thus importuned, the traveler--who was as ill-looking a fellow
as one would desire to meet, in a solitary piece of woods--appeared
to hesitate a little, as if he was either searching his memory for
news or weighing the expediency of telling it.  At last, mounting on
the step of the cart, he whispered in the ear of Dominicus, though he
might have shouted aloud and no other mortal would have heard him.

"I do remember one little trifle of news," said he.  "Old Mr.
Higginbotham, of Kimballton, was murdered in his orchard, at eight
o'clock last night, by an Irishman and a nigger.  They strung him up
to the branch of a St. Michael's pear-tree, where nobody would find
him till the morning."

As soon as this horrible intelligence was communicated the stranger
betook himself to his journey again, with more speed than ever, not
even turning his head when Dominicus invited him to smoke a Spanish
cigar and relate all the particulars.  The pedler whistled to his
mare and went up the hill, pondering on the doleful fate of Mr.
Higginbotham, whom he had known in the way of trade, having sold him
many a bunch of long nines, and a great deal of pigtail, lady's
twist, and fig tobacco.  He was rather astonished at the rapidity
with which the news had spread.  Kimballton was nearly sixty miles
distant in a straight line; the murder had been perpetrated only at
eight o'clock the preceding night; yet Dominicus had heard of it at
seven in the morning, when, in all probability, poor Mr.
Higginbotham'a own family had but just discovered his corpse, hanging
on the St. Michael's pear-tree.  The stranger on foot must have worn
seven-league boots, to travel at such a rate.

"Ill news flies fast, they say," thought Dominicus Pike; "but this
beats railroads.  The fellow ought to be hired to go express with the
President's Message."

The difficulty was solved by supposing that the narrator had made a
mistake of one day in the date of the occurrence; so that our friend
did not hesitate to introduce the story at every tavern and country
store along the road, expending a whole bunch of Spanish wrappers
among at least twenty horrified audiences.  He found himself
invariably the first bearer of the intelligence, and was so pestered
with questions that he could not avoid filling up the outline, till
it became quite a respectable narrative.  He met with one piece of
corroborative evidence.  Mr. Higginbotham was a trader; and a former
clerk of his, to whom Dominicus related the facts, testified that the
old gentleman was accustomed to return home through the orchard,
about nightfall, with the money and valuable papers of the store in
his pocket.  The clerk manifested but little grief at Mr.
Higginbotham's catastrophe, hinting, what the pedler had discovered
in his own dealings with him, that he was a crusty old fellow, as
close as a vise.  His property would descend to a pretty niece who
was now keeping school in Kimballton.

What with telling the news for the public good, and driving bargains
for his own, Dominicus was so much delayed on the road that he chose
to put up at a tavern, about five miles short of Parker's Falls.
After supper, lighting one of his prime cigars, he seated himself in
the barroom, and went through the story of the murder, which had
grown so fast that it took him a half hour to tell.  There were as
many as twenty people in the room, nineteen of whom received it all
for gospel.  But the twentieth was an elderly farmer, who had arrived
on horseback a short time before, and was now seated in a corner
smoking his pipe.  When the story was concluded, he rose up very
deliberately, brought his chair right in front of Dominicus, and
stared him full in the face, puffing out the vilest tobacco smoke the
pedler had ever smelled.

"Will you make affidavit," demanded he in the tone of a country
justice taking an examination, "that old Squire Higginbotham of
Kimballton was murdered in his orchard the night before last, and
found hanging on his great pear-tree yesterday morning?"

"I tell the story as I heard it, mister," answered Dominicus,
dropping his half-burned cigar; "I don't say that I saw the thing
done.  So I can't take my oath that he was murdered exactly in that
way."

"But I can take mine," said the farmer, "that if Squire Higginbotham
was murdered night before last, I drank a glass of bitters with his
ghost this morning.  Being a neighbor of mine, he called me into his
store, as I was riding by, and treated me, and then asked me to do a
little business for him on the road.  He didn't seem to know any more
about his own murder than I did."

"Why, then, it can't be a fact!" exclaimed Dominicus Pike.

"I guess he'd have mentioned it, if it was," said the old farmer; and
he removed his chair back to the corner, leaving Dominicus quite down
in the mouth.

Here was a sad resurrection of old Mr. Higginbotham!  The pedler had
no heart to mingle in the conversation any more, but comforted
himself with a glass of gin and water, and went to bed, where, all
night long, he dreamed of hanging on the St. Michael's pear-tree.  To
avoid the old farmer (whom he so detested that his suspension would
have pleased him better than Mr. Higginbotham's), Dominicus rose in
the gray of the morning, put the little mare into the green cart, and
trotted swiftly away toward Parker's Falls.  The fresh breeze, the
dewy road, and the pleasant summer dawn revived his spirits, and
might have encouraged him to repeat the old story had there been
anybody awake to hear it.  But he met neither ox-team, light wagon,
chaise, horseman, nor foot-traveler, till, just as he crossed Salmon
River, a man came trudging down to the bridge with a bundle over his
shoulder, on the end of a stick.

"Good morning, mister," said the pedler, reining in his mare.  "If
you come from Kimballton or that neighborhood maybe you can tell me
the real fact about this affair of old Mr. Higginbotham.  Was the old
fellow actually murdered, two or three nights ago, by an Irishman and
a nigger?"

Dominicus had spoken in too great a hurry to observe, at first, that
the stranger himself had a deep tinge of negro blood.  On hearing
this sudden question, the Ethiopian appeared to change his skin, its
yellow hue becoming a ghastly white, while, shaking and stammering,
he thus replied:

"No! no!  There was no colored man!  It was an Irishman that hanged
him last night, at eight o'clock.  I came away at seven!  His folks
can't have looked for him in the orchard yet."

Scarcely had the yellow man spoken, when he interrupted himself, and,
though he seemed weary enough before, continued his journey at a pace
which would have kept the pedler's mare on a smart trot.  Dominicus
stared after him in great perplexity.  If the murder had not been
committed till Tuesday night, who was the prophet that had foretold
it, in all its circumstances, on Tuesday morning?  If Mr.
Higginbotham's corpse were not yet discovered by his own family, how
came the mulatto, at above thirty miles' distance, to know that he
was hanging in the orchard, especially as he had left Kimballton
before the unfortunate man was hanged at all?  These ambiguous
circumstances, with the stranger's surprise and terror, made
Dominicus think of raising a hue and cry after him, as an accomplice
in the murder; since a murder, it seemed, had really been perpetrated.

"But let the poor devil go," thought the pedler.  "I don't want his
black blood on my head; and hanging the nigger wouldn't unhang Mr.
Higginbotham.  Unhang the old gentleman!  It's a sin, I know; but I
should hate to have him come to life a second time, and give me the
lie!"

With these meditations, Dominicus Pike drove into the street of
Parker's Falls, which, as everybody knows, is as thriving a village
as three cotton factories and a slitting mill can make it.  The
machinery was not in motion, and but a few of the shop doors
unbarred, when he alighted in the stable-yard of the tavern, and made
it his first business to order the mare four quarts of oats.  His
second duty, of course, was to impart Mr. Higginbotham's catastrophe
to the hostler.  He deemed it advisable, however, not to be too
positive as to the date of the direful fact, and also to be uncertain
whether it were perpetrated by an Irishman and a mulatto, or by the
son of Erin alone.  Neither did he profess to relate it on his own
authority, nor that of any one person; but mentioned it as a report
generally diffused.

The story ran through the town like fire among girdled trees, and
became so much the universal talk that nobody could tell whence it
had originated.  Mr. Higginbotham was as well known at Parker's Falls
as any citizen of the place, being part owner of the slitting mill,
and a considerable stockholder in the cotton factories.  The
inhabitants felt their own prosperity interested in his fate.  Such
was the excitement that the "Parker's Falls Gazette" anticipated its
regular day of publication, and came out with half a form of blank
paper and a column of double pica emphasized with capitals, and
headed "HORRID MURDER OF MR. HIGGINBOTHAM!"  Among other dreadful
details, the printed account described the mark of the cord round the
dead man's neck, and stated the number of thousand dollars of which
he had been robbed; there was much pathos also about the affliction
of his niece, who had gone from one fainting fit to another, ever
since her uncle was found hanging on the St. Michael's pear-tree with
his pockets inside out.  The village poet likewise commemorated the
young lady's grief in seventeen stanzas of a ballad.  The selectmen
held a meeting, and, in consideration of Mr. Higginbotham's claims on
the town, determined to issue handbills, offering a reward of five
hundred dollars for the apprehension of his murderers, and the
recovery of the stolen property.

Meanwhile, the whole population of Parker's Falls, consisting of
shopkeepers, mistresses of boarding-houses, factory girls, mill men,
and schoolboys, rushed into the street, and kept up such a terrible
loquacity as more than compensated for the silence of the
cotton-machines which refrained from their usual din, out of respect
to the deceased.  Had Mr. Higginbotham cared about posthumous renown,
his untimely ghost would have exulted in this tumult.  Our friend
Dominicus, in his vanity of heart, forgot his intended precautions,
and, mounting on the town pump, announced himself as the bearer of
the authentic intelligence which had caused so wonderful a sensation.
He immediately became the great man of the moment, and had just begun
a new edition of the narrative, with a voice like a field preacher,
when the mail stage drove into the village street.  It had traveled
all night, and must have shifted horses at Kimballton at three in the
morning.

"Now we shall hear all the particulars," shouted the crowd.

The coach rumbled up to the piazza of the tavern, followed by a
thousand people; for if any man had been minding his own business
till then, he now left it at sixes and sevens, to hear the news.  The
pedler, foremost in the race, discovered two passengers, both of whom
had been startled from a comfortable nap to find themselves in the
centre of a mob.  Every man assailing them with separate questions,
all propounded at once, the couple were struck speechless, though one
was a lawyer and the other a young lady.

"Mr. Higginbotham!  Mr. Higginbotham!  Tell us the particulars about
old Mr. Higginbotham!" bawled the mob.  "What is the coroner's
verdict?  Are the murderers apprehended?  Is Mr. Higginbotham's niece
come out of her fainting fits?  Mr. Higginbotham!  Mr. Higginbotham!!"

The coachman said not a word, except to swear awfully at the hostler
for not bringing him a fresh team of horses.  The lawyer inside had
generally his wits about him, even when asleep; the first thing he
did, after learning the cause of the excitement, was to produce a
large red pocketbook.  Meantime, Dominicus Pike, being an extremely
polite young man, and also suspecting that a female tongue would tell
the story as glibly as a lawyer's, had handed the lady out of the
coach.  She was a fine, smart girl, now wide-awake and bright as a
button, and had such a sweet, pretty mouth that Dominicus would
almost as lief have heard a love tale from it as a tale of murder.

"Gentlemen and ladies," said the lawyer, to the shopkeepers, the mill
men, and the factory girls, "I can assure you that some unaccountable
mistake, or, more probably, a wilful falsehood, maliciously contrived
to injure Mr. Higginbotham's credit, has excited this singular
uproar.  We passed through Kimballton at three o'clock this morning,
and most certainly should have been informed of the murder had any
been perpetrated.  But I have proof, nearly as strong as Mr.
Higginbotham's own oral testimony, in the negative.  Here is a note,
relating to a suit of his in the Connecticut courts, which was
delivered me from that gentleman himself.  I find it dated at ten
o'clock last evening."

So saying, the lawyer exhibited the date and signature of the note,
which irrefragably proved, either that this perverse Mr. Higginbotham
was alive when he wrote it, or--as some deemed the more probable case
of two doubtful ones--that he was so absorbed in worldly business as
to continue to transact it, even after his death.  But unexpected
evidence was forthcoming.  The young lady, after listening to the
pedler's explanation, merely seized a moment to smooth her gown and
put her curls in order, and then appeared at the tavern-door, making
a modest signal to be heard.

"Good people," said she, "I am Mr. Higginbotham's niece."

A wondering murmur passed through the crowd, on beholding her so rosy
and bright; that same unhappy niece whom they had supposed, on the
authority of the "Parker's Falls Gazette," to be lying at death's
door in a fainting fit.  But some shrewd fellows had doubted, all
along, whether a young lady would be quite so desperate at the
hanging of a rich old uncle.

"You see," continued Miss Higginbotham, with a smile, "that this
strange story is quite unfounded, as to myself; and I believe I may
affirm it to be equally so in regard to my dear uncle Higginbotham.
He has the kindness to give me a home in his house, though I
contribute to my own support by teaching a school.  I left Kimballton
this morning to spend the vacation of commencement week with a
friend, about five miles from Parker's Falls.  My generous uncle,
when he heard me on the stairs, called me to his bedside, and gave me
two dollars and fifty cents, to pay my stage fare, and another dollar
for my extra expenses.  He then laid his pocketbook under his pillow,
shook hands with me, and advised me to take some biscuit in my bag,
instead of breakfasting on the road.  I feel confident, therefore,
that I left my beloved relative alive, and trust that I shall find
him so on my return."

The young lady courtesied at the close of her speech, which was so
sensible and well-worded, and delivered with such grace and
propriety, that everybody thought her fit to be Preceptress of the
best Academy in the State.  But a stranger would have supposed that
Mr. Higginbotham was an object of abhorrence at Parker's Falls, and
that a thanksgiving had been proclaimed for his murder, so excessive
was the wrath of the inhabitants on learning their mistake.  The mill
men resolved to bestow public honors on Dominicus Pike, only
hesitating whether to tar and feather him, ride him on a rail, or
refresh him with an ablution at the town-pump on the top of which he
had declared himself the bearer of the news.  The selectmen, by
advice of the lawyer, spoke of prosecuting him for a misdemeanor, in
circulating unfounded reports, to the great disturbance of the peace
of the commonwealth.  Nothing saved Dominicus, either from mob law or
a court of justice, but an eloquent appeal made by the young lady in
his behalf.  Addressing a few words of heartfelt gratitude to his
benefactress, he mounted the green cart and rode out of town, under a
discharge of artillery from the schoolboys, who found plenty of
ammunition in the neighboring clay-pits and mud-holes.  As he turned
his head, to exchange a farewell glance with Mr. Higginbotham's
niece, a ball, of the consistence of hasty-pudding, hit him slap in
the mouth, giving him a most grim aspect.  His whole person was so
bespattered with the like filthy missiles, that he had almost a mind
to ride back and supplicate for the threatened ablution at the
town-pump; for, though not meant in kindness, it would now have been
a deed of charity.

However, the sun shone bright on poor Dominicus, and the mud, an
emblem of all stains of undeserved opprobrium, was easily brushed off
when dry.  Being a funny rogue, his heart soon cheered up; nor could
he refrain from a hearty laugh at the uproar which his story had
excited.  The hand-bills of the selectmen would cause the commitment
of all the vagabonds in the State; the paragraph in the "Parker's
Falls Gazette" would be reprinted from Maine to Florida, and perhaps
form an item in the London newspapers; and many a miser would tremble
for his money-bags and life, on learning the catastrophe of Mr.
Higginbotham.  The pedler meditated with much fervor on the charms of
the young schoolmistress, and swore that Daniel Webster never spoke
nor looked so like an angel as Miss Higginbotham, while defending him
from the wrathful populace at Parker's Falls.

Dominicus was now on the Kimballton Turnpike, having all along
determined to visit that place, though business had drawn him out of
the most direct road from Morristown.  As he approached the scene of
the supposed murder, he continued to revolve the circumstances in his
mind, and was astonished at the aspect which the whole case assumed.
Had nothing occurred to corroborate the story of the first traveler,
it might now have been considered as a hoax; but the yellow man was
evidently acquainted either with the report or the fact; and there
was a mystery in his dismayed and guilty look on being abruptly
questioned.  When, to this singular combination of incidents, it was
added that the rumor tallied exactly with Mr. Higginbotham's
character and habits of life; and that he had an orchard, and a St.
Michael's pear-tree, near which he always passed at nightfall; the
circumstantial evidence appeared so strong that Dominicus doubted
whether the autograph produced by the lawyer, or even the niece's
direct testimony, ought to be equivalent.  Making cautious inquiries
along the road, the pedler further learned that Mr. Higginbotham had
in his service an Irishman of doubtful character, whom he had hired
without a recommendation, on the score of economy.

"May I be hanged myself," exclaimed Dominicus Pike aloud, on reaching
the top of a lonely hill, "if I'll believe old Higginbotham is
unhanged till I see him with my own eyes and hear it from his own
mouth?  And as he's a real shaver, I'll have the minister or some
other responsible man for an endorser."

It was growing dusk when he reached the toll-house on Kimballton
Turnpike, about a quarter of a mile from the village of this name.
His little mare was fast bringing him up with a man on horseback, who
trotted through the gate a few rods in advance of him, nodded to the
toll-gatherer, and kept on toward the village.  Dominicus was
acquainted with the toll-man, and while making change the usual
remarks on the weather passed between them.

"I suppose," said the pedler, throwing back his whip-lash, to bring
it down like a feather on the mare's flank, "you have not seen
anything of old Mr. Higginbotham within a day or two?"

"Yes," answered the toll-gatherer.  "He passed the gate just before
you drove up, and yonder he rides now, if you can see him through the
dusk.  He's been to Woodfield this afternoon, attending a sheriff's
sale there.  The old man generally shakes hands and has a little chat
with me; but to-night he nodded--as if to say, 'Charge my toll'--and
jogged on; for wherever he goes, he must always be home at eight
o'clock."

"So they tell me," said Dominicus.

"I never saw a man look so yellow and thin as the squire does,"
continued the toll-gatherer.  "Says I to myself, to-night, 'He's more
like a ghost or an old mummy than good flesh and blood.'"

The pedler strained his eyes through the twilight, and could just
discern the horseman, now far ahead on the village road.  He seemed
to recognize the rear of Mr. Higginbotham; but through the evening
shadows, and amid the dust from the horse's feet, the figure appeared
dim and unsubstantial; as if the shape of the mysterious old man were
faintly molded of darkness and gray light.  Dominicus shivered.

"Mr. Higginbotham has come back from the other world, by way of the
Kimballton Turnpike," thought he.

He shook the reins and rode forward, keeping about the same distance
in the rear of the gray old shadow, till the latter was concealed by
a bend of the road.  On reaching this point, the pedler no longer saw
the man on horseback, but found himself at the head of the village
street, not far from a number of stores and two taverns, clustered
round the meeting-house steeple.  On his left was a stone wall and a
gate, the boundary of a wood-lot, beyond which lay an orchard,
further still a mowing field, and last of all a house.  These were
the premises of Mr. Higginbotham, whose dwelling stood beside the old
highway, but had been left in the background by the Kimballton
Turnpike.  Dominicus knew the place; and the little mare stopped
short by instinct; for he was not conscious of tightening the reins.

"For the soul of me, I can not get by this gate!" said he, trembling.
"I never shall be my own again, till I see whether Mr. Higginbotham
is hanging on the St. Michael's pear-tree!"

He leaped from the cart, gave the rein a turn around the gate-post,
and ran along the green path of the wood-lot, as if Old Nick were
chasing behind.  Just then the village clock tolled eight, and as
each deep stroke fell, Dominicus gave a fresh bound and flew faster
than before, till, dim in the solitary centre of the orchard, he saw
the fated pear-tree.  One great branch stretched from the old
contorted trunk across the path, and threw the darkest shadow on that
one spot.  But something seemed to struggle beneath the branch!

The pedler had never pretended to more courage than befits a man of
peaceable occupation, nor could he account for his valor on this
awful emergency.  Certain it is, however, that he rushed forward,
prostrated a sturdy Irishman with the butt-end of his whip, and
found--not indeed hanging on the St. Michael's pear-tree, but
trembling beneath it, with a halter round his neck--the old identical
Mr. Higginbotham!

"Mr. Higginbotham," said Dominicus, tremulously, "you're an honest
man, and I'll take your word for it.  Have you been hanged or not?"

If the riddle be not already guessed, a few words will explain the
simple machinery by which this "coming event" was made to "cast its
shadow before."  Three men had plotted the robbery and murder of Mr.
Higginbotham; two of them, successively, lost courage and fled, each
delaying the crime one night by their disappearance; the third was in
the act of perpetration, when a champion, blindly obeying the call of
fate, like the heroes of old romance, appeared in the person of
Dominicus Pike.

It only remains to say that Mr. Higginbotham took the pedler into
high favor, sanctioned his addresses to the pretty schoolmistress,
and settled his whole property on their children, allowing themselves
the interest.  In due time, the old gentleman capped the climax of
his favors by dying a Christian death, in bed, since which melancholy
event Dominicus Pike has removed from Kimballton, and established a
large tobacco manufactory in my native village.




THE WHITE OLD MAID

BY NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE

_This is an admirable example of Hawthorne's point of view and style.
Starting with an aim to leave one strong impression on the mind of
the reader, instead of the remembrance of a number of related facts,
the author not only omits everything that would detract from the
unity and strength of this impression, but creates only such scenes
and situations as will intensify the effect._



THE WHITE OLD MAID

By NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE

The moonbeams came through two deep and narrow windows and showed a
spacious chamber richly furnished in an antique fashion.  From one
lattice the shadow of the diamond panes was thrown upon the floor;
the ghostly light through the other swept upon a bed, falling between
the heavy silken curtains and illuminating the face of a young man.
But how quietly the slumberer lay! how pale his features!  And how
like a shroud the sheet was wound about his frame!  Yes, it was a
corpse in its burial clothes.

Suddenly the fixed features seemed to move with dark emotion.
Strange fantasy!  It was but the shadow of the fringed curtain waving
between the dead face and the moonlight as the door of the chamber
opened and a girl stole softly to the bedside.  Was there delusion in
the moonbeams, or did her gesture and her eye betray a gleam of
triumph as she bent over the pale corpse, pale as itself, and pressed
her living lips to the cold ones of the dead?  As she drew back from
that long kiss her features writhed as if a proud heart were fighting
with its anguish.  Again it seemed that the features of the corpse
had moved responsive to her own.  Still an illusion.  The silken
curtains had waved a second time between the dead face and the
moonlight as another fair young girl unclosed the door and glided
ghostlike to the bedside.  There the two maidens stood, both
beautiful, with the pale beauty of the dead between them.  But she
who had first entered was proud and stately, and the other a soft and
fragile thing.

"Away!" cried the lofty one.  "Thou hadst him living; the dead is
mine."

"Thine!" returned the other, shuddering.  "Well hast thou spoken; the
dead is thine."

The proud girl started and stared into her face with a ghastly look,
but a wild and mournful expression passed across the features of the
gentle one, and, weak and helpless, she sank down on the bed, her
head pillowed beside that of the corpse and her hair mingling with
his dark locks.  A creature of hope and joy, the first draft of
sorrow had bewildered her.

"Edith!" cried her rival.

Edith groaned as with a sudden compression of the heart, and removing
her cheek from the dead youth's pillow, she stood upright, fearfully
encountering the eyes of the lofty girl.

"Wilt thou betray me?" said the latter, calmly.

"Till the dead bid me speak I will be silent," answered Edith.
"Leave us alone together.  Go and live many years, and then return
and tell me of thy life.  He too will be here.  Then, if thou tellest
of sufferings more than death, we will both forgive thee."

"And what shall be the token?" asked the proud girl, as if her heart
acknowledged a meaning in these wild words.

"This lock of hair," said Edith, lifting one of the dark clustering
curls that lay heavily on the dead man's brow.

The two maidens joined their hands over the bosom of the corpse and
appointed a day and hour far, far in time to come for their next
meeting in that chamber.  The statelier girl gave one deep look at
the motionless countenance and departed, yet turned again and
trembled ere she closed the door, almost believing that her dead
lover frowned upon her.  And Edith, too!  Was not her white form
fading into the moonlight?  Scorning her own weakness, she went forth
and perceived that a negro slave was waiting in the passage with a
waxlight, which he held between her face and his own and regarded
her, as she thought, with an ugly expression of merriment.  Lifting
his torch on high, the slave lighted her down the staircase and undid
the portal of the mansion.  The young clergyman of the town had just
ascended the steps, and, bowing to the lady, passed in without a word.

Years--many years--rolled on.  The world seemed new again, so much
older was it grown since the night when those pale girls had clasped
their hands across the bosom of the corpse.  In the interval a lonely
woman had passed from youth to extreme age, and was known by all the
town as the "Old Maid in the Winding-Sheet."  A taint of insanity had
affected her whole life, but so quiet, sad, and gentle, so utterly
free from violence, that she was suffered to pursue her harmless
fantasies unmolested by the world with whose business or pleasures
she had naught to do.  She dwelt alone, and never came into the
daylight except to follow funerals.  Whenever a corpse was borne
along the street, in sunshine, rain, or snow, whether a pompous train
of the rich and proud thronged after it, or few and humble were the
mourners, behind them came the lonely woman in a long white garment
which the people called her shroud.  She took no place among the
kindred or the friends, but stood at the door to hear the funeral
prayer, and walked in the rear of the procession as one whose earthly
charge it was to haunt the house of mourning and be the shadow of
affliction and see that the dead were duly buried.  So long had this
been her custom that the inhabitants of the town deemed her a part of
every funeral, as much as the coffin-pall or the very corpse itself,
and augured ill of the sinner's destiny unless the Old Maid in the
Winding-Sheet came gliding like a ghost behind.  Once, it is said,
she affrighted a bridal-party with her pale presence, appearing
suddenly in the illuminated hall just as the priest was uniting a
false maid to a wealthy man before her lover had been dead a year.
Evil was the omen to that marriage.  Sometimes she stole forth by
moonlight and visited the graves of venerable integrity and wedded
love and virgin innocence, and every spot where the ashes of a kind
and faithful heart were moldering.  Over the hillocks of those
favored dead would she stretch out her arms with a gesture as if she
were scattering seeds, and many believed that she brought them from
the garden of Paradise, for the graves which she had visited were
green beneath the snow and covered with sweet flowers from April to
November.  Her blessing was better than a holy verse upon the
tombstone.  Thus wore away her long, sad, peaceful, and fantastic
life till few were so old as she, and the people of later generations
wondered how the dead had ever been buried or mourners had endured
their grief without the Old Maid in the Winding-Sheet.  Still years
went on, and still she followed funerals and was not yet summoned to
her own festival of death.

One afternoon the great street of the town was all alive with
business and bustle, though the sun now gilded only the upper half of
the church-spire, having left the house-tops and loftiest trees in
shadow.  The scene was cheerful and animated in spite of the sombre
shade between the high brick buildings.  Here were pompous merchants
in white wigs and laced velvet, the bronzed faces of sea-captains,
the foreign garb and air of Spanish Creoles, and the disdainful port
of natives of Old England, all contrasted with the rough aspect of
one or two back-settlers negotiating sales of timber from forests
where ax had never sounded.  Sometimes a lady passed, swelling
roundly forth in an embroidered petticoat, balancing her steps in
high-heeled shoes and courtesying with lofty grace to the punctilious
obeisances of the gentlemen.  The life of the town seemed to have its
very centre not far from an old mansion that stood somewhat back from
the pavement, surrounded by neglected grass, with a strange air of
loneliness rather deepened than dispelled by the throng so near it.
Its site would have been suitably occupied by a magnificent Exchange
or a brick block lettered all over with various signs, or the large
house itself might have made a noble tavern with the "King's Arms"
swinging before it and guests in every chamber, instead of the
present solitude.  But, owing to some dispute about the right of
inheritance, the mansion had been long without a tenant, decaying
from year to year and throwing the stately gloom of its shadow over
the busiest part of the town.

Such was the scene, and such the time, when a figure unlike any that
have been described was observed at a distance down the street.

"I spy a strange sail yonder," remarked a Liverpool captain--"that
woman in the long white garment."

The sailor seemed much struck by the object, as were several others
who at the same moment caught a glimpse of the figure that had
attracted his notice.  Almost immediately the various topics of
conversation gave place to speculations in an undertone on this
unwonted occurrence.

"Can there be a funeral so late this afternoon?" inquired some.

They looked for the signs of death at every door--the sexton, the
hearse, the assemblage of black-clad relatives, all that makes up the
woful pomp of funerals.  They raised their eyes, also, to the
sun-gilded spire of the church, and wondered that no clang proceeded
from its bell, which had always tolled till now when this figure
appeared in the light of day.  But none had heard that a corpse was
to be borne to its home that afternoon, nor was there any token of a
funeral except the apparition of the Old Maid in the Winding-Sheet.

"What may this portend?" asked each man of his neighbor.

All smiled as they put the question, yet with a certain trouble in
their eyes, as if pestilence, or some other wide calamity, were
prognosticated by the untimely intrusion among the living of one
whose presence had always been associated with death and woe.  What a
comet is to the earth was that sad woman to the town.  Still she
moved on, while the hum of surprise was hushed at her approach, and
the proud and the humble stood aside that her white garment might not
wave against them.  It was a long, loose robe of spotless purity.
Its wearer appeared very old, pale, emaciated, and feeble, yet glided
onward without the unsteady pace of extreme age.  At one point of her
course a little rosy boy burst forth from a door and ran with open
arms toward the ghostly woman, seeming to expect a kiss from her
bloodless lips.  She made a slight pause, fixing her eye upon him
with an expression of no earthly sweetness, so that the child
shivered and stood awestruck rather than affrighted while the Old
Maid passed on.  Perhaps her garment might have been polluted even by
an infant's touch; perhaps her kiss would have been death to the
sweet boy within the year.

"She is but a shadow," whispered the superstitious.  "The child put
forth his arms and could not grasp her robe."

The wonder was increased when the Old Maid passed beneath the porch
of the deserted mansion, ascended the moss-covered steps, lifted the
iron knocker and gave three raps.  The people could only conjecture
that some old remembrance, troubling her bewildered brain, had
impelled the poor woman hither to visit the friends of her youth--all
gone from their home long since, and forever, unless their ghosts
still haunted it, fit company for the Old Maid in the Winding-Sheet.

An elderly man approached the steps, and, reverently uncovering his
gray locks, essayed to explain the matter.

"None, madam," said he, "have dwelt in this house these fifteen years
agone--no, not since the death of old Colonel Fenwicke, whose funeral
you may remember to have followed.  His heirs, being ill-agreed among
themselves, have let the mansion-house go to ruin."

The Old Maid looked slowly round with a slight gesture of one hand
and a finger of the other upon her lip, appearing more shadow-like
than ever in the obscurity of the porch.  But again she lifted the
hammer, and gave, this time, a single rap.  Could it be that a
footstep was now heard coming down the staircase of the old mansion
which all conceived to have been so long untenanted?  Slowly, feebly,
yet heavily, like the pace of an aged and infirm person, the step
approached, more distinct on every downward stair, till it reached
the portal.  The bar fell on the inside; the door was opened.  One
upward glance toward the church-spire, whence the sunshine had just
faded, was the last that the people saw of the Old Maid in the
Winding-Sheet.

"Who undid the door?" asked many.

This question, owing to the depth of shadow beneath the porch, no one
could satisfactorily answer.  Two or three aged men, while protesting
against an inference which might be drawn, affirmed that the person
within was a negro, and bore a singular resemblance to Old Cæsar,
formerly a slave in the house, but freed by death some thirty years
before.

"Her summons has waked up a servant of the old family," said one,
half seriously.

"Let us wait here," replied another; "more guests will knock at the
door anon.  But the gate of the graveyard should be thrown open."

Twilight had overspread the town before the crowd began to separate
or the comments on this incident were exhausted.  One after another
was wending his way homeward, when a coach--no common spectacle in
those days--drove slowly into the street.  It was an old-fashioned
equipage, hanging close to the ground, with arms on the panels, a
footman behind, and a grave, corpulent coachman seated high in front,
the whole giving an idea of solemn state and dignity.  There was
something awful in the heavy rumbling of the wheels.

The coach rolled down the street, till, coming to the gateway of the
deserted mansion, it drew up, and the footman sprang to the ground.

"Whose grand coach is this?" asked a very inquisitive body.

The footman made no reply, but ascended the steps of the old house,
gave three taps with the iron hammer, and returned to open the coach
door.  An old man possessed of the heraldic lore so common in that
day examined the shield of arms on the panel.

"Azure, a lion's head erased, between three flowers-de-luce," said
he, then whispered the name of the family to whom these bearings
belonged.  The last inheritor of its honors was recently dead, after
a long residence amid the splendor of the British court, where his
birth and wealth had given him no mean station.  "He left no child,"
continued the herald, "and these arms, being in a lozenge, betoken
that the coach appertains to his widow."

Further disclosures, perhaps, might have been made had not the
speaker been suddenly struck dumb by the stern eye of an ancient lady
who thrust forth her head from the coach preparing to descend.  As
she emerged, the people saw that her dress was magnificent, and her
figure dignified in spite of age and infirmity--a stately ruin, but
with a look at once of pride and wretchedness.  Her strong and rigid
features had an awe about them unlike that of the white Old Maid, but
as of something evil.  She passed up the steps, leaning on a
gold-headed cane.  The door swung open as she ascended, and the light
of a torch glittered on the embroidery of her dress and gleamed on
the pillars of the porch.  After a momentary pause, a glance backward
and then a desperate effort, she went in.

The decipherer of the coat-of-arms had ventured up the lower step,
and, shrinking back immediately, pale and tremulous, affirmed that
the torch was held by the very image of Old Cæsar.

"But such a hideous grin," added he, "was never seen on the face of
mortal man, black or white.  It will haunt me till my dying day."

Meantime, the coach had wheeled round with a prodigious clatter on
the pavement and rumbled up the street, disappearing in the twilight,
while the ear still tracked its course.  Scarcely was it gone when
the people began to question whether the coach and attendants, the
ancient lady, the spectre of Old Cæsar and the Old Maid herself were
not all a strangely combined delusion with some dark purport in its
mystery.  The whole town was astir, so that, instead of dispersing,
the crowd continually increased, and stood gazing up at the windows
of the mansion, now silvered by the brightening moon.  The elders,
glad to indulge the narrative propensity of age, told of the
long-faded splendor of.  the family, the entertainments they had
given and the guests, the greatest of the land, and even titled and
noble ones from abroad, who had passed beneath that portal.  These
graphic reminiscences seemed to call up the ghosts of those to whom
they referred.  So strong was the impression on some of the more
imaginative hearers that two or three were seized with trembling fits
at one and the same moment, protesting that they had distinctly heard
three other raps of the iron knocker.

"Impossible!" exclaimed others.  "See!  The moon shines beneath the
porch, and shows every part of it except in the narrow shade of that
pillar.  There is no one there."

"Did not the door open?" whispered one of these fanciful persons.

"Didst thou see it too?" said his companion, in a startled tone.

But the general sentiment was opposed to the idea that a third
visitant had made application at the door of the deserted house.  A
few, however, adhered to this new marvel, and even declared that a
red gleam like that of a torch had shone through the great front
window, as if the negro were lighting a guest up the staircase.  This
too was pronounced a mere fantasy.

But at once the whole multitude started, and each man beheld his own
terror painted in the faces of all the rest.

"What an awful thing is this!" cried they.

A shriek, too fearfully distinct for doubt, had been heard within the
mansion, breaking forth suddenly and succeeded by a deep stillness,
as if a heart had burst in giving it utterance.  The people knew not
whether to fly from the very sight of the house or to rush trembling
in and search out the strange mystery.  Amid their confusion and
affright they were somewhat reassured by the appearance of their
clergyman, a venerable patriarch, and equally a saint, who had taught
them and their fathers the way to heaven for more than the space of
an ordinary lifetime.  He was a reverend figure with long white hair
upon his shoulders, a white beard upon his breast, and a back so bent
over his staff that he seemed to be looking downward continually, as
if to choose a proper grave for his weary frame.  It was some time
before the good old man, being deaf and of impaired intellect, could
be made to comprehend such portions of the affair as were
comprehensible at all.  But when possessed of the facts, his energies
assumed unexpected vigor.

"Verily," said the old gentleman, "it will b$ fitting that I enter
the mansion-house of the worthy Colonel Fenwicke; lest any harm
should have befallen that true Christian woman whom ye call the 'Old
Maid in the Winding-Sheet.'"

Behold, then, the venerable clergyman ascending the steps of the
mansion with a torch-bearer behind him.  It was the elderly man who
had spoken to the Old Maid, and the same who had afterward explained
the shield of arms and recognized the features of the negro.  Like
their predecessors, they gave three raps with the iron hammer.

"Old Cæsar cometh not," observed the priest.  "Well, I wot he no
longer doth service in this mansion."

"Assuredly, then, it was something worse in Old Cæsar's likeness,"
said the other adventurer.

"Be it as God wills," answered the clergyman.  "See! my strength,
though it be much decayed, hath sufficed to, open this heavy door.
Let us enter and pass up the staircase."

Here occurred a singular exemplification of the dreamy state of a
very old man's mind.  As they ascended the wide flight of stairs the
aged clergyman appeared to move with caution, occasionally standing
aside, and oftener bending his head, as it were in salutation, thus
practising all the gestures of one who makes his way through a
throng.  Reaching the head of the staircase, he looked around with
sad and solemn benignity, laid aside his staff, bared his hoary
locks, and was evidently on the point of commencing a prayer.

"Reverend sir," said his attendant, who conceived this a very
suitable prelude to their further search, "would it not be well that
the people join with us in prayer?"

"Well-a-day!" cried the old clergyman, staring strangely around him.
"Art thou here with me, and none other?  Verily, past times were
present to me, and I deemed that I was to make a funeral prayer, as
many a time heretofore, from the head of this staircase.  Of a truth,
I saw the shades of many that are gone.  Yea, I have prayed at their
burials, one after another, and the Old Maid in the Winding-Sheet
hath seen them to their graves."

Being now more thoroughly awake to their present purpose, he took his
staff and struck forcibly on the floor, till there came an echo from
each deserted chamber, but no menial to answer their summons.  They,
therefore, walked along the passage, and again paused, opposite to
the great front window, through which was seen the crowd in the
shadow and partial moonlight of the street beneath.  On the right
hand was the open door of a chamber, and a closed one on their left.

The clergyman pointed his cane to the carved oak panel of the latter.

"Within that chamber," observed he, "a whole lifetime since, did I
sit by the deathbed of a goodly young man who, being now at the last
gasp--"  Apparently, there was some powerful excitement in the ideas
which had now flashed across his mind.  He snatched the torch from
his companion's hand, and threw open the door with such sudden
violence that the flame was extinguished, leaving them no other light
than the moonbeams which fell through two windows into the spacious
chamber.  It was sufficient to discover all that could be known.  In
a high-backed oaken armchair, upright, with her hands clasped across
her breast and her head thrown back, sat the Old Maid in the
Winding-Sheet.  The stately dame had fallen on her knees with her
forehead on the holy knees of the Old Maid, one hand upon the floor
and the other pressed convulsively against her heart.  It clutched a
lock of hair--once sable, now discolored with a greenish mold.

As the priest and layman advanced into the chamber the Old Maid's
features assumed such a semblance of shifting expression that they
trusted to hear the whole mystery explained by a single word.  But it
was only the shadow of a tattered curtain waving between the dead
face and the moonlight.

"Both dead!" said the venerable man.  "Then who shall divulge the
secret?  Methinks it glimmers to and fro in my mind like the light
and shadow across the Old Maid's face.  And now 'tis gone!"




WANDERING WILLIE'S TALE

BY SIR WAITER SCOTT

_Sir Walter Scott, born in Edinburgh in 1771 and died at "Abbotsford"
in 1832, published the first of his Waverley Novels ("Waverley") in
1814.  "Redgauntlet," in which "Wandering Willie's Tale" occurs,
appeared in 1824.  Wandering Willie, who tells the tale, is Willie
Steenson, a blind fiddler devoted to the Redgauntlet family.  Many
critics consider this the finest story in the English language.
Andrew Lang, who calls it "immortal," describes ft as "that perfect
model of a 'conte' in whose narrow range humor, poetry, the
grotesque, the terrible are combined as in no other work of man."_



WANDERING WILLIE'S TALE

By SIR WALTER SCOTT

Ye maun have heard of Sir Robert Redgauntlet of that Ilk, who lived
in these parts before the dear years.  The country will lang mind
him; and our fathers used to draw breath thick if ever they heard him
named.  He was out wi' the Hielandmen in Montrose's time; and again
he was in the hills wi' Glencairn in the saxteen hundred and
fifty-twa; and sae when King Charles the Second came in, wha was in
sic favor as the Laird of Redgauntlet?  He was knighted at Lonon
court, wi' the King's ain sword; and being a red-hot prelatist, he
came down here, rampauging like a lion, with commissions of
lieutenancy (and of lunacy, for what I ken), to put down a' the Whigs
and Covenanters in the country.  Wild wark they made of it; for the
Whigs were as dour as the Cavaliers were fierce, and it was which
should first tire the other.  Redgauntlet was aye for the strong
hand; and his name is kenn'd as wide in the country as Claverhouse's
or Tam Dalyell's.  Glen, nor dargle, nor mountain, nor cave could
hide the puir Hill-folk when Redgauntlet was out with bugle and
bloodhound after them, as if they had been sae mony deer.  And troth
when they fand them, they didna mak muckle mair ceremony than a
Hielandman wi' a roebuck.  It was just, "Will ye tak the test?"  If
not, "Make ready--present--fire!" and there lay the recusant.

Far and wide was Sir Robert hated and feared.  Men thought he had a
direct compact with Satan; that he was proof against steel, and that
bullets happed aff his buff-coat like hailstanes from a hearth; that
he had a mear that would turn a hare on the side of Carrifra
Gauns--and muckle to the same purpose, of whilk mair anon.  The best
blessing they wared on him was, "Deil scowp wi' Redgauntlet!"  He
wasna a bad maister to his ain folk though, and was weel aneugh liked
by his tenants; and as for the lackies and troopers that raid out wi'
him to the persecutions, as the Whigs ca'd those killing times, they
wad hae drunken themsells blind to his health at ony time.

Now you are to ken that my gudesire lived on Redgauntlet's grund;
they ca' the place Primrose Knowe.  We had lived on the grund, and
under the Redgauntlets, since the riding days, and lang before.  It
was a pleasant bit; and I think the air is callerer and fresher there
than onywhere else in the country.  It's a' deserted now; and I sat
on the broken door-cheek three days since, and was glad I couldna see
the plight the place was in; but that's a' wide o' the mark.  There
dwelt my gudesire, Steenie Steenson, a rambling, rattling chiel he
had been in his young days, and could play weel on the pipes; he was
famous at "Hoopers and Girders," a' Cumberland couldna touch him at
"Jockie Lattin," and he had the finest finger for the backlilt
between Berwick and Carlisle.  The like o' Steenie wasna the sort
that they made Whigs o'.  And so he became a Tory, as they ca' it,
which we now ca' Jacobites, just out of a kind of needcessity, that
he might belang to some side or other.  He had nae ill-will to the
Whig bodies, and liked little to see the blude rin, though being
obliged to follow Sir Robert in hunting and hosting, watching and
warding, he saw muckle mischief, and maybe did some, that he couldna
avoid.

Now Steenie was a kind of favorite with his master, and kenn'd a' the
folks about the castle, and was often sent for to play the pipes when
they were at their merriment.  Auld Dougal MacCallum, the butler,
that had followed Sir Robert through gude and ill, thick and thin,
pool and stream, was specially fond of the pipes, and aye gae my
gudesire his gude word wi' the laird; for Dougal could turn his
master round his finger.

Weel, round came the Revolution, and it had like to have broken the
hearts baith of Dougal and his master.  But the change was not
a'thegither sae great as they feared, and other folk thought for.
The Whigs made an unco crawing what they wad do with their auld
enemies, and in special wi' Sir Robert Redgauntlet.  But there were
ower mony great folks dipped in the same doings to mak a spick span
new warld.  So Parliament passed it a' ower easy; and Sir Robert,
bating that he was held to hunting foxes instead of Covenanters,
remained just the man he was.  His revel was as loud, and his hall as
weel lighted, as ever it had been, though maybe he lacked the fines
of the Nonconformists, that used to come to stock his larder and
cellar; for it is certain he began to be keener about the rents than
his tenants used to find him before, and they behoved to be prompt to
the rent-day, or else the laird wasna pleased.  And he was sic an
awsome body that naebody cared to anger him; for the oaths he swore,
and the rage that he used to get into, and the looks that he put on,
made men sometimes think him a devil incarnate.

Weel, my gudesire was nae manager--no that he was a very great
misguider--but he hadna the saving gift, and he got twa terms' rent
in arrear.  He got the first brash at Whitsunday put ower wi' fair
word and piping; but when Martinmas came, there was a summons from
the grund-officer to come wi' the rent on a day preceese, or else
Steenie behoved to flit.  Sair wark he had to get the siller; but he
was weel-freended, and at last he got the haill scraped thegither--a
thousand merks; the maist of it was from a neighbor they ca'd Laurie
Lapraik--a sly tod.  Laurie had walth o' gear--could hunt wi' the
hound and rin wi' the hare--and be Whig or Tory, saunt or sinner, as
the wind stood.  He was a professor in this Revolution warld; but he
liked an orra sough of this warld, and a tune on the pipes weel
aneugh at a bytime; and abune a' he thought he had gude security for
the siller he lent my gudesire ower the stocking at Primrose Knowe.

Away trots my gudesire to Redgauntlet Castle, wi' a heavy purse and a
light heart, glad to be out of the laird's danger.  Weel, the first
thing he learned at the castle was that Sir Robert had fretted
himsell into a fit of the gout, because he did not appear before
twelve o'clock.  It wasna a'thegither for sake of the money, Dougal
thought; but because he didna like to part wi' my gudesire aff the
grund.  Dougal was glad to see Steenie, and brought him into the
great oak parlor, and there sat the laird his leesome lane, excepting
that he had beside him a great ill-favored jackanape, that was a
special pet of his--a cankered beast it was, and mony an ill-natured
trick it played; ill to please it was, and easily angered--ran about
the haill castle, chattering and yowling, and pinching and biting
folk, especially before ill weather, or disturbances in the state.
Sir Robert ca'd it Major Weir, after the warlock that was burnt;* and
few folk liked either the name or the conditions of the
creature--they thought there was something in it by ordinar--and my
gudesire was not just easy in mind when the door shut on him, and he
saw himself in the room wi' naebody but the laird, Dougal MacCallum,
and the major, a thing that hadna chanced to him before.


* A celebrated wizard, executed (1670) at Edinburgh for sorcery and
other crimes.


Sir Robert sat, or, I should say, lay, in a great armed chair, wi'
his grand velvet gown, and his feet on a cradle; for he had baith
gout and gravel, and his face looked as gash and ghastly as Satan's.
Major Weir sat opposite to him, in a red laced coat, and the laird's
wig on his head; and aye as Sir Robert girned wi' pain, the jackanape
girned too, like a sheep's-head between a pair of tangs--an
ill-faured, fearsome couple they were.  The laird's buff-coat was
hung on a pin behind him, and his broadsword and his pistols within
reach; for he keepit up the auld fashion of having the weapons ready,
and a horse saddled day and night, just as he used to do when he was
able to loup on horseback, and away after ony of the Hill-folk he
could get speerings of.  Some said it was for fear of the Whigs
taking vengeance, but I judge it was just his auld custom--he wasna
gien to fear onything.  The rental-book, wi' its black cover and
brass clasps, was lying beside him; and a book of sculduggery sangs
was put betwixt the leaves, to keep it open at the place where it
bore evidence against the goodman of Primrose Knowe, as behind the
hand with his mails and duties.  Sir Robert gave my gudesire a look
as if he would have withered his heart in his bosom.  Ye maun ken he
had a way of bending his brows that men saw the visible mark of a
horseshoe in his forehead, deep-dinted, as if it had been stamped
there.

"Are ye come light-handed, ye son of a toom whistle?" said Sir
Robert.  "Zounds! if you are--"

My gudesire, with as gude a countenance as he could put on, made a
leg, and placed the bag of money on the table wi' a dash, like a man
that does something clever.  The laird drew it to him hastily.  "Is
it all here, Steenie, man?"

"Your honor will find it right," said my gudesire.

"Here, Dougal," said the laird, "gie Steenie a tass of brandy
downstairs, till I count the siller and write the receipt."

But they werena weel out of the room when Sir Robert gied a yelloch
that garr'd the castle rock.  Back ran Dougal--in flew the
livery-men--yell on yell gied the laird, ilk ane mair awfu' than the
ither.  My gudesire knew not whether to stand or flee, but he
ventured back into the parlor, where a' was gaun
hirdie-girdie--naebody to say "come in" or "gae out."  Terribly the
laird roared for cauld water to his feet, and wine to cool his
throat; and "Hell, hell, hell, and its flames," was aye the word in
his mouth.  They brought him water, and when they plunged his swoln
feet into the tub, he cried out it was burning; and folk say that it
did bubble and sparkle like a seething caldron.  He flung the cup at
Dougal's head, and said he had given him blood instead of burgundy;
and, sure aneugh, the lass washed clotted blood aff the carpet the
neist day.  The jackanape they ca'd Major Weir, it jibbered and cried
as if it was mocking its master.  My gudesire's head was like to
turn: he forgot baith siller and receipt, and downstairs he banged;
but as he ran, the shrieks came faint and fainter; there was a
deep-drawn shivering groan, and word gaed through the castle that the
laird was dead.

Weel, away came my gudesire wi' his finger in his mouth, and his best
hope was that Dougal had seen the moneybag, and heard the laird speak
of writing the receipt.  The young laird, now Sir John, came from
Edinburgh to see things put to rights.  Sir John and his father never
gree'd weel.  Sir John had been bred an advocate, and afterward sat
in the last Scots Parliament and voted for the Union, having gotten,
it was thought, a rug of the compensations; if his father could have
come out of his grave he would have brained him for it on his awn
hearthstane.  Some thought it was easier counting with the auld rough
knight than the fair-spoken young ane--but mair of that anon.

Dougal MacCallum, poor body, neither grat nor graned, but gaed about
the house looking like a corpse, but directing, as was his duty, a'
the order of the grand funeral.  Now, Dougal looked aye waur and waur
when night was coming, and was aye the last to gang to his bed, whilk
was in a little round just opposite the chamber of dais, whilk his
master occupied while he was living, and where he now lay in state,
as they ca'd it, weel-a-day!  The night before the funeral, Dougal
could keep his awn counsel nae langer: he came doun with his proud
spirit, and fairly asked auld Hutcheon to sit in his room with him
for an hour.  When they were in the round, Dougal took ae tass of
brandy to himsell and gave another to Hutcheon, and wished him all
health and lang life, and said that, for himsell, he wasna lang for
this world; for that, every night since Sir Robert's death, his
silver call had sounded from the state chamber, just as it used to do
at nights in his lifetime, to call Dougal to help to turn him in his
bed.  Dougal said that, being alone with the dead on that floor of
the tower (for naebody cared to wake Sir Robert Redgauntlet like
another corpse), he had never daured to answer the call, but that now
his conscience checked him for neglecting his duty; for, "though
death breaks service," said MacCallum, "it shall never break my
service to Sir Robert; and I will answer his next whistle, so be you
will stand by me, Hutcheon."

Hutcheon had nae will to work, but he had stood by Dougal in battle
and broil, and he wad not fail him at this pinch; so down the carles
sat ower a stoup of brandy, and Hutcheon, who was something of a
clerk, would have read a chapter of the Bible; but Dougal would hear
naething but a blaud of Davie Lindsay, whilk was the waur preparation.

When midnight came, and the house was quiet as the grave, sure aneugh
the silver whistle sounded as sharp and shrill as if Sir Robert was
blowing it, and up gat the twa auld serving-men and tottered into the
room where the dead man lay.  Hutcheon saw aneugh at the first
glance; for there were torches in the room, which showed him the foul
fiend in his ain shape, sitting on the laird's coffin!  Ower he
couped as if he had been dead.  He could not tell how lang he lay in
a trance at the door, but when he gathered himsell he cried on his
neighbor, and getting nae answer, raised the house, when Dougal was
found lying dead within twa steps of the bed where his master's
coffin was placed.  As for the whistle, it was gaen anes and aye; but
mony a time was it heard at the top of the house on the bartizan, and
amang the auld chimneys and turrets, where the howlets have their
nests.  Sir John hushed the matter up, and the funeral passed over
without mair bogle-wark.

But when a' was ower, and the laird was beginning to settle his
affairs, every tenant was called up for his arrears, and my gudesire
for the full sum that stood him in the rental-book.  Weel, away he
trots to the castle, to tell his story, and there he is introduced to
Sir John, sitting in his father's chair, in deep mourning, with
weepers and hanging cravat, and a small walking rapier by his side,
instead of the auld broadsword that had a hundredweight of steel
about it, what with blade, chape, and basket-hilt.  I have heard
their communing so often tauld ower, that I almost think I was there
mysell, though I couldna be born at the time.  (In fact, Alan, my
companion mimicked, with a good deal of humor, the flattering,
conciliating tone of the tenant's address, and the hypocritical
melancholy of the laird's reply.  His grandfather, he said, had,
while he spoke, his eye fixed on the rental-book, as if it were a
mastiff-dog that he was afraid would spring up and bite him.)

"I wuss ye joy, sir, of the head seat, and the white loaf, and the
braid lairdship.  Your father was a kind man to friends and
followers; muckle grace to you, Sir John, to fill his shoon--his
boots, I suld say, for he seldom wore shoon, unless it were muils
when he had the gout."

"Ay, Steenie," quoth the laird, sighing deeply, and putting his
napkin to his een, "his was a sudden call, and he will be missed in
the country; no time to set his house in order: weel prepared
Godward, no doubt, which is the root of the matter, but left us
behind a tangled hesp to wind, Steenie.  Hem! hem!  We maun go to
business, Steenie; much to do, and little time to do it in."

Here he opened the fatal volume.  I have heard of a thing they call
Doomsday Book--I am clear it has been a rental of back-ganging
tenants.

"Stephen," said Sir John, still in the same soft, sleekit tone of
voice--"Stephen Stevenson, or Steenson, ye are down here for a year's
rent behind the hand, due at last term."

Stephen.  "Please your honor, Sir John, I paid it to your father."

Sir John.  "Ye took a receipt then, doubtless, Stephen, and can
produce it?"

Stephen.  "Indeed I hadna time, an it like your honor; for nae sooner
had I set doun the siller, and just as his honor Sir Robert, that's
gaen, drew it till him to count it, and write out the receipt, he was
ta'en wi' the pains that removed him."

"That was unlucky," said Sir John, after a pause.  "But ye maybe paid
it in the presence of somebody.  I want but a talis qualis evidence,
Stephen.  I would go ower strictly to work with no poor man."

Stephen.  "Troth, Sir John, there was naebody in the room but Dougal
MacCallum, the butler.  But, as your honor kens, he has e'en followed
his auld master."

"Very unlucky again, Stephen," said Sir John, without altering his
voice a single note.  "The man to whom ye paid the money is dead; and
the man who witnessed the payment is dead too; and the siller, which
should have been to the fore, is neither seen nor heard tell of in
the repositories.  How am I to believe a' this?"

Stephen.  "I dinna ken, your honor; but there is a bit memorandum
note of the very coins--for, God help me!  I had to borrow out of
twenty purses--and I am sure that ilka man there set down will take
his grit oath for what purpose I borrowed the money."

Sir John.  "I have little doubt ye borrowed the money, Steenie.  It
is the payment to my father that I want to have some proof of."

Stephen.  "The siller maun be about the house, Sir John.  And since
your honor never got it, and his honor that was canna have ta'en it
wi' him, maybe some of the family may have seen it."

Sir John.  "We will examine the servants, Stephen; that is but
reasonable."

But lackey and lass, and page and groom, all denied stoutly that they
had ever seen such a bag of money as my gudesire described.  What was
waur, he had unluckily not mentioned to any living soul of them his
purpose of paying his rent.  Ae quean had noticed something under his
arm, but she took it for the pipes.

Sir John Redgauntlet ordered the servants out of the room, and then
said to my gudesire: "Now, Steenie, ye see you have fair play; and,
as I have little doubt ye ken better where to find the siller than
any other body, I beg, in fair terms, and for your own sake, that you
will end this fasherie; for, Stephen, ye maun pay or flit."

"The Lord forgie your opinion," said Stephen, driven almost to his
wit's-end--"I am an honest man."

"So am I, Stephen," said his honor; "and so are all the folks in the
house, I hope.  But if there be a knave among us, it must be he that
tells the story he can not prove."  He paused, and then added, mair
sternly: "If I understand your trick, sir, you want to take advantage
of some malicious reports concerning things in this family, and
particularly respecting my father's sudden death, thereby to cheat me
out of the money, and perhaps take away my character, by insinuating
that I have received the rent I am demanding.  Where do you suppose
this money to be?  I insist upon knowing."

My gudesire saw everything look sae muckle against him that he grew
nearly desperate; however, he shifted from one foot to another,
looked to every corner of the room, and made no answer.

"Speak out, sirrah," said the laird, assuming a look of his
father's--a very particular ane, which he had when he was angry: it
seemed as if the wrinkles of his frown made that selfsame fearful
shape of a horse's shoe in the middle of his brow--"speak out, sir!
I will know your thoughts.  Do you suppose that I have this money?"

"Far be it frae me to say so," said Stephen.

"Do you charge any of my people with having taken it?"

"I wad be laith to charge them that may be innocent," said my
gudesire; "and if there be any one that is guilty, I have nae proof."

"Somewhere the money must be, if there is a word of truth in your
story," said Sir John; "I ask where you think it is, and demand a
correct answer?"

"In hell, if you will have my thoughts of it," said my gudesire,
driven to extremity--"in hell! with your father, his jackanape, and
his silver whistle."

Down the stairs he ran, for the parlor was nae place for him after
such a word, and he heard the laird swearing blood and wounds behind
him, as fast as ever did Sir Robert, and roaring for the bailie and
the baron-officer.

Away rode my gudesire to his chief creditor, him they ca'd Laurie
Lapraik, to try if he could make onything out of him; but when he
tauld his story, he got but the warst word in his wame--thief,
beggar, and dyvour were the safest terms; and to the boot of these
hard terms, Laurie brought up the auld story of his dipping his hand
in the blood of God's saunts, just as if a tenant could have helped
riding with the laird, and that a laird like Sir Robert Redgauntlet.
My gudesire was by this time far beyond the bounds of patience, and
while he and Laurie were at deil speed the liars, he was wanchancie
aneugh to abuse Lapraik's doctrine as weel as the man, and said
things that garr'd folks' flesh grue that heard them; he wasna just
himsell, and he had lived wi' a wild set in his day.

At last they parted, and my gudesire was to ride hame through the
wood of Pitmurkie, that is a' fou of black firs, as they say.  I ken
the wood, but the firs may be black or white for what I can tell.  At
the entry of the wood there is a wild common, and on the edge of the
common a little lonely change-house, that was keepit then by a
hostler-wife--they suld hae ca'd her Tibbie Faw--and there puir
Steenie cried for a mutchkin of brandy, for he had had no refreshment
the haill day.  Tibbie was earnest wi' him to take a bite o' meat,
but he couldna think o't, nor would he take his foot out of the
stirrup, and took off the brandy wholly at twa drafts, and named a
toast at each--the first was, the memory of Sir Robert Redgauntlet,
and might he never lie quiet in his grave till he had righted his
poor bond-tenant; and the second was, a health to Man's Enemy, if he
would but get him back the pock of siller, or tell him what came o't,
for he saw the haill world was like to regard him as a thief and a
cheat, and he took that waur than even the ruin of his house and
hauld.

On he rode, little caring where.  It was a dark night turned, and the
trees made it yet darker, and he let the beast take its ain road
through the wood; when, all of a sudden, from tired and wearied that
it was before, the nag began to spring, and flee, and stend, that my
gudesire could hardly keep the saddle; upon the whilk, a horseman,
suddenly riding up beside him, said, "That's a mettle beast of yours,
freend; will you sell him?"  So saying, he touched the horse's neck
with his riding-wand, and it fell into its auld heigh-ho of a
stumbling trot.  "But his spunk's soon out of him, I think,"
continued the stranger, "and that is like mony a man's courage, that
thinks he wad do great things till he come to the proof."

My gudesire scarce listened to this, but spurred his horse, with
"Gude e'en to you, freend."

But it's like the stranger was ane that doesna lightly yield his
point; for, ride as Steenie liked, he was aye beside him at the
salfsame pace.  At last my gudesire, Steenie Steenson, grew half
angry and, to say the truth, half feared.

"What is it that ye want with me, freend?" he said.  "If ye be a
robber, I have nae money; if ye be a leal man, wanting company, I
have nae heart to mirth or speaking; and if ye want to ken the road,
I scarce ken it mysell."

"If you will tell me your grief," said the stranger, "I am one that,
though I have been sair misca'd in the world, am the only hand for
helping my freends."

So my gudesire, to ease his ain heart, mair than from any hope of
help, told him the story from beginning to end.

"It's a hard pinch," said the stranger; "but I think I can help you."

"If you could lend the money, sir, and take a lang day--I ken nae
other help on earth," said my gudesire.

"But there may be some under the earth," said the stranger.  "Come,
I'll be frank wi' you; I could lend you the money on bond, but you
would maybe scruple my terms.  Now, I can tell you that your auld
laird is disturbed in his grave by your curses, and the wailing of
your family, and if ye daur venture to go to see him, he will give
you the receipt."

My gudesire's hair stood on end at this proposal, but he thought his
companion might be some humorsome chield that was trying to frighten
him, and might end with lending him the money.  Besides, he was bauld
wi' brandy, and desperate wi' distress; and he said he had courage to
go to the gate of hell, and a step farther, for that receipt.

The stranger laughed.

Weel, they rode on through the thickest of the wood, when, all of a
sudden, the horse stopped at the door of a great house; and, but that
he knew the place was ten miles off, my gudesire would have thought
he was at Redgauntlet Castle.  They rode into the outer courtyard,
through the muckle faulding yetts, and aneath the auld portcullis;
and the whole front of the house was lighted, and there were pipes
and fiddles, and as much dancing and deray within as used to be in
Sir Robert's house at Pace and Yule, and such high seasons.  They lap
off, and my gudesire, as seemed to him, fastened his horse to the
very ring he had tied him to that morning, when he gaed to wait on
the young Sir John.

"God!" said my gudesire, "if Sir Robert's death be but a dream!"

He knocked at the ha' door just as he was wont, and his auld
acquaintance, Dougal MacCallum, just after his wont, too, came to
open the door, and said, "Piper Steenie, are ye there, lad?  Sir
Robert has been crying for you."

My gudesire was like a man in a dream; he looked for the stranger,
but he was gane for the time.  At last he just tried to say, "Ha!
Dougal Driveower, are ye living?  I thought ye had been dead."

"Never fash yoursell wi' me," said Dougal, "but look to yoursell; and
see ye tak naething frae onybody here, neither meat, drink, or
siller, except just the receipt that is your ain."

So saying, he led the way out through halls and trances that were
weel kenn'd to my gudesire, and into the auld oak parlor; and there
was as much singing of profane sangs, and birling of red wine, and
speaking blasphemy and sculduddry, as had ever been in Redgauntlet
Castle when it was at the blythest.

But, Lord take us in keeping! what a set of ghastly revelers they
were that sat round that table!  My gudesire kenn'd mony that had
long before gane to their place, for often had he piped to the most
part in the hall of Redgauntlet.  There was the fierce Middleton, and
the dissolute Rothes, and the crafty Lauderdale; and Dalyell, with
his bald head and a beard to his girdle; and Earlshall, with
Cameron's blude on his hand; and wild Bonshaw, that tied blessed Mr.
Cargill's limbs till the blude sprung; and Dumbarton Douglas, the
twice-turned traitor baith to country and king.  There was the Bluidy
Advocate MacKenyie, who, for his worldly wit and wisdom, had been to
the rest as a god.  And there was Claverhouse, as beautiful as when
he lived, with his long dark, curled locks, streaming down over his
laced buff-coat, and his left hand always on his right spule-blade,
to hide the wound that the silver bullet had made.  He sat apart from
them all, and looked at them with a melancholy, haughty countenance;
while the rest hallooed, and sung, and laughed, that the room rang.
But their smiles were fearfully contorted from time to time; and
their laughter passed into such wild sounds as made my gudesire's
very nails grow blue, and chilled the marrow in his banes.

They that waited at the table were just the wicked serving-men and
troopers that had done their work and cruel bidding on earth.  There
was the Lang Lad of the Nethertown, that helped to take Argyle; and
the bishop's summoner, that they called the Deil's Rattle-bag; and
the wicked guardsmen, in their laced coats; and the savage Highland
Amorites, that shed blood like water; and mony a proud serving-man,
haughty of heart and bloody of hand, cringing to the rich, and making
them wickeder than they would be; grinding the poor to powder, when
the rich had broken them to fragments.  And mony, mony mair were
coming and ganging, a' as busy in their vocation as if they had been
alive.

Sir Robert Redgauntlet, in the midst of a' this fearful riot, cried,
wi' a voice like thunder, on Steenie Piper to come to the board-head
where he was sitting, his legs stretched out before him, and swathed
up with flannel, with his holster pistols aside him, while the great
broadsword rested against his chair, just as my gudesire had seen him
the last time upon earth--the very cushion for the jackanape was
close to him, but the creature itsell was not there; it wasna its
hour, it's likely; for he heard them say as he came forward, "Is not
the major come yet?"  And another answered, "The jackanape will be
here betimes the morn."  And when my gudesire came forward, Sir
Robert, or his ghaist, or the deevil in his likeness, said, "Weel,
piper, hae ye settled wi' my son for the year's rent?"

With much ado my father gat breath to say that Sir John would not
settle without his honor's receipt.

"Ye shall hae that for a tune of the pipes, Steenie," said the
appearance of Sir Robert.  "Play us up, 'Weel noddled, Luckie.'"

Now this was a tune my gudesire learned frae a warlock, that heard it
when they were worshiping Satan at their meetings, and my gudesire
had sometimes played it at the ranting suppers in Redgauntlet Castle,
but never very willingly; and now he grew cauld at the very name of
it, and said, for excuse, he hadna his pipes wi' him.

"MacCallum, ye limb of Beelzebub," said the fearfu' Sir Robert,
"bring Steenie the pipes that I am keeping for him!"

MacCallum brought a pair of pipes might have served the piper of
Donald of the Isles.  But he gave my gudesire a nudge as he offered
them; and looking secretly and closely, Steenie saw that the chanter
was of steel, and heated to a white heat; so he had fair warning not
to trust his fingers with it.  So he excused himself again, and said
he was faint and frightened, and had not wind enough to fill the bag.

"Then ye maun eat and drink, Steenie," said the figure; "for we do
little else here; and it's ill speaking between a fou man and a
fasting."

Now these were the very words that the bloody Earl of Douglas said to
keep the king's messenger in hand, while he cut the head off
MacLellan of Bombie, at the Threave Castle, and that put Steenie mair
and mair on his guard.  So he spoke up like a man, and said he came
neither to eat, or drink, or make minstrelsy, but simply for his
ain--to ken what was come o' the money he had paid, and to get a
discharge for it; and he was so stout-hearted by this time, that he
charged Sir Robert for conscience' sake (he had no power to say the
holy name), and as he hoped for peace and rest, to spread no snares
for him, but just to give him his ain.

The appearance gnashed its teeth and laughed, but it took from a
large pocket-book the receipt, and handed it to Steenie.  "There is
your receipt, ye pitiful cur; and for the money, my dog-whelp of a
son may go look for it in the Cat's Cradle."

My gudesire uttered mony thanks, and was about to retire when Sir
Robert roared aloud: "Stop though, thou sack-doudling son of a whore!
I am not done with thee.  _Here_ we do nothing for nothing; and you
must return on this very day twelvemonth to pay your master the
homage that you owe me for my protection."

My father's tongue was loosed of a suddenty, and he said aloud: "I
refer mysell to God's pleasure, and not to yours."

He had no sooner uttered the word than all was dark around him, and
he sunk on the earth with such a sudden shock that he lost both
breath and sense.

How lang Steenie lay there, he could not tell; but when he came to
himsell, he was lying in the auld kirkyard of Redgauntlet parochine,
just at the door of the family aisle, and the scutcheon of the auld
knight, Sir Robert, hanging over his head.  There was a deep morning
fog on grass and gravestane around him, and his horse was feeding
quietly beside the minister's twa cows.  Steenie would have thought
the whole was a dream, but he had the receipt in his hand, fairly
written and signed by the auld laird; only the last letters of his
name were a little disorderly, written like one seized with sudden
pain.

Sorely troubled in his mind, he left that dreary place, rode through
the mist to Redgauntlet Castle, and with much ado he got speech of
the laird.

"Well, you dyvour bankrupt," was the first word, "have you brought me
my rent?"

"No," answered my gudesire, "I have not; but I have brought your
honor Sir Robert's receipt for it."

"How, sirrah?  Sir Robert's receipt!  You told me he had not given
you one."

"Will your honor please to see if that bit line is right?"

Sir John looked at every line, and at every letter, with much
attention, and at last at the date, which my gudesire had not
observed--"'From my appointed place,'" he read, "'this twenty-fifth
of November.'  What!  That is yesterday!  Villain, thou must have
gone to Hell for this!"

"I got it from your honor's father; whether he be in Heaven or Hell,
I know not," said Steenie.

"I will delate you for a warlock to the privy council!" said Sir
John.  "I will send you to your master, the devil, with the help of a
tar-barrel and a torch!"

"I intend to delate mysell to the presbytery," said Steenie, "and
tell them all I have seen last night, whilk are things fitter for
them to judge of than a borrel man like me."

Sir John paused, composed himsell, and desired to hear the full
history; and my gudesire told it him from point to point, as I have
told it you--word for word, neither more nor less.

Sir John was silent again for a long time, and at last he said, very
composedly: "Steenie, this story of yours concerns the honor of many
a noble family besides mine; and if it be a leasing-making, to keep
yourself out of my danger, the least you can expect is to have a
red-hot iron driven through your tongue, and that will be as bad as
scauding your fingers with a red-hot chanter.  But yet it may be
true, Steenie; and if the money cast up, I shall not know what to
think of it.  But where shall we find the Cat's Cradle?  There are
cats enough about the old house, but I think they kitten without the
ceremony of bed or cradle."

"We were best ask Hutcheon," said my gudesire; "he kens a' the odd
corners about as weel as--another serving-man that is now gane, and
that I wad not like to name."

Aweel, Hutcheon, when he was asked, told them that a ruinous turret,
lang disused, next to the clock-house, only accessible by a ladder,
for the opening was on the outside, and far above the battlements,
was called of old the Cat's Cradle.

"There will I go immediately," said Sir John; and he took (with what
purpose, Heaven kens) one of his father's pistols from the
hall-table, where they had lain since the night he died, and hastened
to the battlements.

It was a dangerous place to climb, for the ladder was auld and frail,
and wanted ane or twa rounds.  However, up got Sir John, and entered
at the turret door, where his body stopped the only little light that
was in the bit turret.  Something flees at him wi' a vengeance, maist
dang him back ower; bang gaed the knight's pistol, and Hutcheon, that
held the ladder, and my gudesire that stood beside him, hears a loud
skelloch.  A minute after, Sir John flings the body of the jackanape
down to them, and cries that the siller is fund, and that they should
come up and help him.  And there was the bag of siller sure aneugh,
and mony orra things besides that had been missing for mony a day.
And Sir John, when he had riped the turret weel, led my gudesire into
the dining-parlor, and took him by the hand, and spoke kindly to him,
and said he was sorry he should have doubted his word, and that he
would hereafter be a good master to him, to make amends.

"And now, Steenie," said Sir John, "although this vision of yours
tends, on the whole, to my father's credit, as an honest man, that he
should, even after his death, desire to see justice done to a poor
man like you, yet you are sensible that ill-dispositioned men might
make bad constructions upon it, concerning his soul's health.  So, I
think, we had better lay the haill dirdum on that ill-deedie
creature, Major Weir, and say naething about your dream in the wood
of Pitmurkie, You had taken ower muckle brandy to be very certain
about onything; and, Steenie, this receipt (his hand shook while he
held it out), it's but a queer kind of document, and we will do best,
I think, to put it quietly in the fire."

"Od, but for as queer as it is, it's a' the voucher I have for my
rent," said my gudesire, who was afraid, it may be, of losing the
benefit of Sir Robert's discharge.

"I will bear the contents to your credit in the rental-book, and give
you a discharge under my own hand," said Sir John, "and that on the
spot.  And, Steenie, if you can hold your tongue about this matter,
you shall sit, from this term downward, at an easier rent."

"Mony thanks to your honor," said Steenie, who saw easily in what
corner the wind was; "doubtless I will be conformable to all your
honor's commands; only I would willingly speak wi' some powerful
minister on the subject, for I do not like the sort of summons of
appointment whilk your honor's father--"

"Do not call the phantom my father!" said Sir John, interrupting him.

"Weel, then, the thing that was so like him," said my gudesire; "he
spoke of my coming back to him this time twelvemonth, and it's a
weight on my conscience."

"Aweel, then," said Sir John, "if you be so much distressed in mind,
you speak to our minister of the parish; he is a douce man, regards
the honor of our family, and the mair that he may look for some
patronage from me."

Wi' that my gudesire readily agreed that the receipt should be
burned, and the laird threw it into the chimney with his ain hand.
Burn it would not for them, though; but away it flew up the lum, wi'
a lang train of sparks at its tail, and a hissing noise like a squib.

My gudesire gaed down to the manse, and the minister, when he had
heard the story, said it was his real opinion that, though my
gudesire had gaen very far in tampering with dangerous matters, yet,
as he had refused the devil's arles (for such was the offer of meat
and drink), and had refused to do homage by piping at his bidding, he
hoped, that if he held a circumspect walk hereafter, Satan could take
little advantage by what was come and gane.  And, indeed, my
gudesire, of his ain accord, lang foreswore baith the pipes and the
brandy; it was not even till the year was out, and the fatal day
passed, that he would so much as take the fiddle, or drink usquebaugh
or tippenny.

Sir John made up his story about the jackanape as he liked himsell;
and some believe till this day there was no more in the matter than
the filching nature of the brute.  Indeed, ye'll no hinder some to
threap that it was nane o' the Auld Enemy that Dougal and Hutcheon
saw in the laird's room, but only that wanchancie creature, the
major, capering on the coffin; and that, as to the blawing on the
laird's whistle that was heard after he was dead, the filthy brute
could do that as weel as the laird himsell, if no better.  But Heaven
kens the truth, whilk first came out by the minister's wife, after
Sir John and her ain gudeman were baith in the molds.  And then, my
gudesire, wha was failed in his limbs, but not in his judgment or
memory--at least nothing to speak of--was obliged to tell the real
narrative to his freends for the credit of his good name.  He might
else have been charged for a warlock.


The shades of evening were growing thicker around us as my conductor
finished his long narrative with this moral: "Ye see, birkie, it is
nae chancy thing to tak a stranger traveler for a guide when ye are
in an uncouth land."

"I should not have made that inference," said I.  "Your grandfather's
adventure was fortunate for himself, whom it saved from ruin and
distress; and fortunate for his landlord also, whom it prevented from
committing a gross act of injustice."

"Ay, but they had baith to sup the sauce o't sooner or later," said
Wandering Willie.  "What was fristed wasna forgiven.  Sir John died
before he was much over threescore; and it was just like of a
moment's illness.  And for my gudesire, though he departed in fulness
of years, yet there was my father, a yauld man of forty-five, fell
down betwixt the stilts of his pleugh, and raise never again, and
left nae bairn but me, a puir sightless, fatherless, motherless
creature, could neither work nor want.  Things gaed weel aneugh at
first; for Sir Redwald Redgauntlet, the only son of Sir John, and the
oye of auld Sir Robert, and, wae's me! the last of the honorable
house, took the farm off our hands, and brought me into his household
to have care of me.  He liked music, and I had the best teachers
baith England and Scotland could gie me.  Mony a merry year was I wi'
him; but wae's me! he gaed out with other pretty men in the
Forty-five--I'll say nae mair about it.  My head never settled weel
since I lost him; and if I say another word about it, deil a bar will
I have the heart to play the night.  Look out, my gentle chap," he
resumed, in a different tone, "ye should see the lights in Brokenburn
Glen by this time."